source/site/index.rst, before:

==================================
 site --- Site-wide Configuration
==================================

.. module:: site
    :synopsis: Site-wide configuration

The :mod:`site` module handles site-specific configuration, especially
the import path.

Import Path
===========

:mod:`site` is automatically imported each time the interpreter starts
up.  On import, it extends :data:`sys.path` with site-specific names
constructed by combining the prefix values :data:`sys.prefix` and
:data:`sys.exec_prefix` with several suffixes.  The prefix values used
are saved in the module-level variable :data:`PREFIXES` for reference
later.  Under Windows, the suffixes are an empty string and
``lib/site-packages``.  For Unix-like platforms, the values are
``lib/python$version/site-packages`` (where ``$version`` is replaced
by the major and minor version number of the interpreter, such as
``3.5``) and ``lib/site-python``.

.. literalinclude:: site_import_path.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Each of the paths resulting from the combinations is tested, and those
that exist are added to :data:`sys.path`.  This output shows the
framework version of Python installed on a Mac OS X system.

.. NOT RUNNING because virtualenv gives misleading output

.. code-block:: none

    $ python3 site_import_path.py

    Path prefixes:
       /Library/Frameworks/Python.framework/Versions/3.5
       /Library/Frameworks/Python.framework/Versions/3.5
    
    /Library/Frameworks/Python.framework/Versions/3.5
    
      lib/python3.5/site-packages
       exists : True
       in path: True
    
      lib/site-python
       exists : False
       in path: False

User Directories
================

In addition to the global site-packages paths, :mod:`site` is
responsible for adding the user-specific locations to the import path.
The user-specific paths are all based on the :data:`USER_BASE`
directory, which usually located in a part of the file system owned
(and writable) by the current user. Inside the :data:`USER_BASE`
directory is a ``site-packages`` directory, with the path accessible
as :data:`USER_SITE`.

.. literalinclude:: site_user_base.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The :data:`USER_SITE` path name is created using the same
platform-specific suffix values described earlier.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'site_user_base.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 site_user_base.py
	
	Base: /Users/dhellmann/.local
	Site: /Users/dhellmann/.local/lib/python3.5/site-packages

.. {{{end}}}

The user base directory can be set through the :data:`PYTHONUSERBASE`
environment variable, and has platform-specific defaults
(``~/Python$version/site-packages`` for Windows and ``~/.local`` for
non-Windows).

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'PYTHONUSERBASE=/tmp/$USER python3 site_user_base.py', interpreter=None))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ PYTHONUSERBASE=/tmp/$USER python3 site_user_base.py
	
	Base: /tmp/dhellmann
	Site: /tmp/dhellmann/lib/python3.5/site-packages

.. {{{end}}}

The user directory is disabled under some circumstances that would
pose security issues (for example, if the process is running with a
different effective user or group id than the actual user that started
it).  An application can check the setting by examining
``ENABLE_USER_SITE``.

.. literalinclude:: site_enable_user_site.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The user directory can also be explicitly disabled on the command line
with ``-s``.

.. NOT RUNNING because virtualenv forces the flag off if
.. no-global-site-packages.txt exists

.. code-block:: none

    $ python3 site_enable_user_site.py
    
    Flag   : True
    Meaning: Enabled

    $ python3 -s site_enable_user_site.py
    
    Flag   : False
    Meaning: Disabled by command-line option

Path Configuration Files
========================

As paths are added to the import path, they are also scanned for *path
configuration files*.  A path configuration file is a plain text file
with the extension ``.pth``.  Each line in the file can take one of
four forms.

- A full or relative path to another location that should be added to
  the import path.
- A Python statement to be executed.  All such lines must begin with
  an ``import`` statement.
- Blank lines are ignored.
- A line starting with ``#`` is treated as a comment and ignored.

Path configuration files can be used to extend the import path to look
in locations that would not have been added automatically.  For
example, the ``setuptools`` package adds a path to
``easy-install.pth`` when it installs a package in development mode
using ``python setup.py develop``.

The function for extending :data:`sys.path` is public, and it can be used
in example programs to show how the path configuration files work.
Given a directory named ``with_modules`` containing the file ``mymodule.py``
with this ``print`` statement showing how the module was imported:

.. literalinclude:: with_modules/mymodule.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

This script shows how :func:`addsitedir()` extends the import path so
the interpreter can find the desired module.

.. literalinclude:: site_addsitedir.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

After the directory containing the module is added
to :data:`sys.path`, the script can import :mod:`mymodule` without
issue.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'site_addsitedir.py with_modules'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 site_addsitedir.py with_modules
	
	Could not import mymodule: No module named 'mymodule'
	
	New paths:
	./with_modules
	
	Loaded mymodule from with_modules/mymodule.py

.. {{{end}}}

The path changes by :func:`addsitedir` go beyond simply appending the
argument to :data:`sys.path`.  If the directory given to
:func:`addsitedir()` includes any files matching the pattern
``*.pth``, they are loaded as path configuration files.  For example,
if ``with_pth/pymotw.pth`` contains:

.. literalinclude:: with_pth/pymotw.pth
   :caption:

and ``mymodule.py`` is copied to ``with_pth/subdir/mymodule.py``, then
it can be imported by adding ``with_pth`` as a site directory, even
though the module is not in that directory because both ``with_pth`` and
``with_pth/subdir`` are added to the import path.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'site_addsitedir.py with_pth'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 site_addsitedir.py with_pth
	
	Could not import mymodule: No module named 'mymodule'
	
	New paths:
	./with_pth
	./with_pth/subdir
	
	Loaded mymodule from with_pth/subdir/mymodule.py

.. {{{end}}}

If a site directory contains multiple ``.pth`` files, they are
processed in alphabetical order.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'ls -F multiple_pth', interpreter=None))
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'cat multiple_pth/a.pth', interpreter=None, include_prefix=False))
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'cat multiple_pth/b.pth', interpreter=None, include_prefix=False))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ ls -F multiple_pth
	
	a.pth
	b.pth
	from_a/
	from_b/

	$ cat multiple_pth/a.pth
	
	./from_a

	$ cat multiple_pth/b.pth
	
	./from_b

.. {{{end}}}

In this case, the module is found in ``multiple_pth/from_a``
because ``a.pth`` is read before ``b.pth``.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'site_addsitedir.py multiple_pth'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 site_addsitedir.py multiple_pth
	
	Could not import mymodule: No module named 'mymodule'
	
	New paths:
	./multiple_pth
	./multiple_pth/from_a
	./multiple_pth/from_b
	
	Loaded mymodule from multiple_pth/from_a/mymodule.py

.. {{{end}}}


.. module:: sitecustomize
    :synopsis: Site-specific configuration

Customizing Site Configuration
==============================

The :mod:`site` module is also responsible for loading site-wide
customization defined by the local site owner in a
:mod:`sitecustomize` module.  Uses for :mod:`sitecustomize` include
extending the import path and enabling coverage,
profiling, or other development tools.

For example, this ``sitecustomize.py`` script extends the import path
with a directory based on the current platform.  The platform-specific
path in ``/opt/python`` is added to the import path, so any packages
installed there can be imported.  A system like this is useful for
sharing packages containing compiled extension modules between hosts
on a network via a shared file system.  Only the ``sitecustomize.py``
script needs to be installed on each host, and the other packages can
be accessed from the file server.

.. literalinclude:: with_sitecustomize/sitecustomize.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

A simple script can be used to show that ``sitecustomize.py`` is
imported before Python starts running your own code.

.. literalinclude:: with_sitecustomize/site_sitecustomize.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Since :mod:`sitecustomize` is meant for system-wide configuration, it
should be installed somewhere in the default path (usually in the
``site-packages`` directory).  This example sets ``PYTHONPATH``
explicitly to ensure the module is picked up.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'PYTHONPATH=with_sitecustomize python3 with_sitecustomize/site_sitecustomize.py', interpreter=None))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ PYTHONPATH=with_sitecustomize python3 with_sitecustomize/sit\
	e_sitecustomize.py
	
	Loading sitecustomize.py
	Adding new path /opt/python/3.5/Darwin-15.6.0-x86_64-i386-64bit
	Running main program from
	with_sitecustomize/site_sitecustomize.py
	End of path: /opt/python/3.5/Darwin-15.6.0-x86_64-i386-64bit

.. {{{end}}}

.. module:: usercustomize
   :synopsis: User-specific configuration

Customizing User Configuration
==============================

Similar to :mod:`sitecustomize`, the :mod:`usercustomize` module can
be used to set up user-specific settings each time the interpreter
starts up.  :mod:`usercustomize` is loaded after :mod:`sitecustomize`,
so site-wide customizations can be overridden.

In environments where a user's home directory is shared on several
servers running different operating systems or versions, the standard
user directory mechanism may not work for user-specific installations
of packages.  In these cases, a platform-specific directory tree can be
used instead.

.. literalinclude:: with_usercustomize/usercustomize.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Another simple script, similar to the one used for
:mod:`sitecustomize`, can be used to show that ``usercustomize.py`` is
imported before Python starts running other code.

.. literalinclude:: with_usercustomize/site_usercustomize.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Since :mod:`usercustomize` is meant for user-specific configuration
for a user, it should be installed somewhere in the user's default
path, but not on the site-wide path. The default ``USER_BASE``
directory is a good location.  This example sets ``PYTHONPATH``
explicitly to ensure the module is picked up.

.. NOT RUNNING because virtualenv disables user-site which in turns
.. disables usercustomize.

.. code-block:: none

    $ PYTHONPATH=with_usercustomize python3 with_usercustomize/site\
    _usercustomize.py
    
    Loading usercustomize.py
    Adding new path /Users/dhellmann/python/3.5/Darwin-15.5.0-x86_64\
    -i386-64bit
    Running main program from
    with_usercustomize/site_usercustomize.py
    End of path: /Users/dhellmann/python/3.5/Darwin-15.5.0-x86_64\
    -i386-64bit

When the user site directory feature is disabled, :mod:`usercustomize`
is not imported, whether it is located in the user site directory or
elsewhere.

.. NOT RUNNING because virtualenv disables user-site which in turns
.. disables usercustomize.

.. code-block:: none

	$ PYTHONPATH=with_usercustomize python3 -s with_usercustomize/s\
	ite_usercustomize.py
	
	Running main program from
	with_usercustomize/site_usercustomize.py
	End of path: /Users/dhellmann/Envs/pymotw35/lib/python3.5/site-
	packages


Disabling the site Module
=========================

To maintain backwards-compatibility with versions of Python from
before the automatic import was added, the interpreter accepts an
``-S`` option.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, '-S site_import_path.py', line_cleanups=[]))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 -S site_import_path.py
	
	Path prefixes:
	   /Users/dhellmann/Envs/pymotw35/bin/..
	   /Users/dhellmann/Envs/pymotw35/bin/..
	
	/Users/dhellmann/Envs/pymotw35/bin/..
	
	  lib/python3.5/site-packages
	   exists : True
	   in path: False
	
	  lib/site-python
	   exists : False
	   in path: False

.. {{{end}}}

.. seealso::

   * :pydoc:`site`

   * :ref:`sys-imports` -- Description of how the import path defined
     in :mod:`sys` works.

   * `Running code at Python startup
     <http://nedbatchelder.com/blog/201001/running_code_at_python_startup.html>`__
     -- Post from Ned Batchelder discussing ways to cause the Python
     interpreter to run custom initialization code before starting the
     main program execution.

Commit message:

site: explain pth file example better
closes issue #68

source/site/index.rst, after:

==================================
 site --- Site-wide Configuration
==================================

.. module:: site
    :synopsis: Site-wide configuration

The :mod:`site` module handles site-specific configuration, especially
the import path.

Import Path
===========

:mod:`site` is automatically imported each time the interpreter starts
up.  On import, it extends :data:`sys.path` with site-specific names
constructed by combining the prefix values :data:`sys.prefix` and
:data:`sys.exec_prefix` with several suffixes.  The prefix values used
are saved in the module-level variable :data:`PREFIXES` for reference
later.  Under Windows, the suffixes are an empty string and
``lib/site-packages``.  For Unix-like platforms, the values are
``lib/python$version/site-packages`` (where ``$version`` is replaced
by the major and minor version number of the interpreter, such as
``3.5``) and ``lib/site-python``.

.. literalinclude:: site_import_path.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Each of the paths resulting from the combinations is tested, and those
that exist are added to :data:`sys.path`.  This output shows the
framework version of Python installed on a Mac OS X system.

.. NOT RUNNING because virtualenv gives misleading output

.. code-block:: none

    $ python3 site_import_path.py

    Path prefixes:
       /Library/Frameworks/Python.framework/Versions/3.5
       /Library/Frameworks/Python.framework/Versions/3.5
    
    /Library/Frameworks/Python.framework/Versions/3.5
    
      lib/python3.5/site-packages
       exists : True
       in path: True
    
      lib/site-python
       exists : False
       in path: False

User Directories
================

In addition to the global site-packages paths, :mod:`site` is
responsible for adding the user-specific locations to the import path.
The user-specific paths are all based on the :data:`USER_BASE`
directory, which usually located in a part of the file system owned
(and writable) by the current user. Inside the :data:`USER_BASE`
directory is a ``site-packages`` directory, with the path accessible
as :data:`USER_SITE`.

.. literalinclude:: site_user_base.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The :data:`USER_SITE` path name is created using the same
platform-specific suffix values described earlier.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'site_user_base.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 site_user_base.py
	
	Base: /Users/dhellmann/.local
	Site: /Users/dhellmann/.local/lib/python3.5/site-packages

.. {{{end}}}

The user base directory can be set through the :data:`PYTHONUSERBASE`
environment variable, and has platform-specific defaults
(``~/Python$version/site-packages`` for Windows and ``~/.local`` for
non-Windows).

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'PYTHONUSERBASE=/tmp/$USER python3 site_user_base.py', interpreter=None))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ PYTHONUSERBASE=/tmp/$USER python3 site_user_base.py
	
	Base: /tmp/dhellmann
	Site: /tmp/dhellmann/lib/python3.5/site-packages

.. {{{end}}}

The user directory is disabled under some circumstances that would
pose security issues (for example, if the process is running with a
different effective user or group id than the actual user that started
it).  An application can check the setting by examining
``ENABLE_USER_SITE``.

.. literalinclude:: site_enable_user_site.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The user directory can also be explicitly disabled on the command line
with ``-s``.

.. NOT RUNNING because virtualenv forces the flag off if
.. no-global-site-packages.txt exists

.. code-block:: none

    $ python3 site_enable_user_site.py
    
    Flag   : True
    Meaning: Enabled

    $ python3 -s site_enable_user_site.py
    
    Flag   : False
    Meaning: Disabled by command-line option

Path Configuration Files
========================

As paths are added to the import path, they are also scanned for *path
configuration files*.  A path configuration file is a plain text file
with the extension ``.pth``.  Each line in the file can take one of
four forms.

- A full or relative path to another location that should be added to
  the import path.
- A Python statement to be executed.  All such lines must begin with
  an ``import`` statement.
- Blank lines are ignored.
- A line starting with ``#`` is treated as a comment and ignored.

Path configuration files can be used to extend the import path to look
in locations that would not have been added automatically.  For
example, the ``setuptools`` package adds a path to
``easy-install.pth`` when it installs a package in development mode
using ``python setup.py develop``.

The function for extending :data:`sys.path` is public, and it can be used
in example programs to show how the path configuration files work.
Given a directory named ``with_modules`` containing the file ``mymodule.py``
with this ``print`` statement showing how the module was imported:

.. literalinclude:: with_modules/mymodule.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

This script shows how :func:`addsitedir()` extends the import path so
the interpreter can find the desired module.

.. literalinclude:: site_addsitedir.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

After the directory containing the module is added
to :data:`sys.path`, the script can import :mod:`mymodule` without
issue.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'site_addsitedir.py with_modules'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 site_addsitedir.py with_modules
	
	Could not import mymodule: No module named 'mymodule'
	
	New paths:
	./with_modules
	
	Loaded mymodule from with_modules/mymodule.py

.. {{{end}}}

The path changes by :func:`addsitedir` go beyond simply appending the
argument to :data:`sys.path`.  If the directory given to
:func:`addsitedir` includes any files matching the pattern ``*.pth``,
they are loaded as path configuration files. Given a directory
structure like the following

.. code-block:: none
	
	with_pth
	├── pymotw.pth
	└── subdir
	    └── mymodule.py


If ``with_pth/pymotw.pth`` contains

.. literalinclude:: with_pth/pymotw.pth

then ``with_pth/subdir/mymodule.py`` can be imported by adding
``with_pth`` as a site directory, even though the module is not in
that directory because both ``with_pth`` and ``with_pth/subdir`` are
added to the import path.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'site_addsitedir.py with_pth'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 site_addsitedir.py with_pth
	
	Could not import mymodule: No module named 'mymodule'
	
	New paths:
	./with_pth
	./with_pth/subdir
	
	Loaded mymodule from with_pth/subdir/mymodule.py

.. {{{end}}}

If a site directory contains multiple ``.pth`` files, they are
processed in alphabetical order.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'ls -F multiple_pth', interpreter=None))
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'cat multiple_pth/a.pth', interpreter=None, include_prefix=False))
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'cat multiple_pth/b.pth', interpreter=None, include_prefix=False))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ ls -F multiple_pth
	
	a.pth
	b.pth
	from_a/
	from_b/

	$ cat multiple_pth/a.pth
	
	./from_a

	$ cat multiple_pth/b.pth
	
	./from_b

.. {{{end}}}

In this case, the module is found in ``multiple_pth/from_a``
because ``a.pth`` is read before ``b.pth``.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'site_addsitedir.py multiple_pth'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 site_addsitedir.py multiple_pth
	
	Could not import mymodule: No module named 'mymodule'
	
	New paths:
	./multiple_pth
	./multiple_pth/from_a
	./multiple_pth/from_b
	
	Loaded mymodule from multiple_pth/from_a/mymodule.py

.. {{{end}}}


.. module:: sitecustomize
    :synopsis: Site-specific configuration

Customizing Site Configuration
==============================

The :mod:`site` module is also responsible for loading site-wide
customization defined by the local site owner in a
:mod:`sitecustomize` module.  Uses for :mod:`sitecustomize` include
extending the import path and enabling coverage,
profiling, or other development tools.

For example, this ``sitecustomize.py`` script extends the import path
with a directory based on the current platform.  The platform-specific
path in ``/opt/python`` is added to the import path, so any packages
installed there can be imported.  A system like this is useful for
sharing packages containing compiled extension modules between hosts
on a network via a shared file system.  Only the ``sitecustomize.py``
script needs to be installed on each host, and the other packages can
be accessed from the file server.

.. literalinclude:: with_sitecustomize/sitecustomize.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

A simple script can be used to show that ``sitecustomize.py`` is
imported before Python starts running your own code.

.. literalinclude:: with_sitecustomize/site_sitecustomize.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Since :mod:`sitecustomize` is meant for system-wide configuration, it
should be installed somewhere in the default path (usually in the
``site-packages`` directory).  This example sets ``PYTHONPATH``
explicitly to ensure the module is picked up.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'PYTHONPATH=with_sitecustomize python3 with_sitecustomize/site_sitecustomize.py', interpreter=None))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ PYTHONPATH=with_sitecustomize python3 with_sitecustomize/sit\
	e_sitecustomize.py
	
	Loading sitecustomize.py
	Adding new path /opt/python/3.5/Darwin-15.6.0-x86_64-i386-64bit
	Running main program from
	with_sitecustomize/site_sitecustomize.py
	End of path: /opt/python/3.5/Darwin-15.6.0-x86_64-i386-64bit

.. {{{end}}}

.. module:: usercustomize
   :synopsis: User-specific configuration

Customizing User Configuration
==============================

Similar to :mod:`sitecustomize`, the :mod:`usercustomize` module can
be used to set up user-specific settings each time the interpreter
starts up.  :mod:`usercustomize` is loaded after :mod:`sitecustomize`,
so site-wide customizations can be overridden.

In environments where a user's home directory is shared on several
servers running different operating systems or versions, the standard
user directory mechanism may not work for user-specific installations
of packages.  In these cases, a platform-specific directory tree can be
used instead.

.. literalinclude:: with_usercustomize/usercustomize.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Another simple script, similar to the one used for
:mod:`sitecustomize`, can be used to show that ``usercustomize.py`` is
imported before Python starts running other code.

.. literalinclude:: with_usercustomize/site_usercustomize.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Since :mod:`usercustomize` is meant for user-specific configuration
for a user, it should be installed somewhere in the user's default
path, but not on the site-wide path. The default ``USER_BASE``
directory is a good location.  This example sets ``PYTHONPATH``
explicitly to ensure the module is picked up.

.. NOT RUNNING because virtualenv disables user-site which in turns
.. disables usercustomize.

.. code-block:: none

    $ PYTHONPATH=with_usercustomize python3 with_usercustomize/site\
    _usercustomize.py
    
    Loading usercustomize.py
    Adding new path /Users/dhellmann/python/3.5/Darwin-15.5.0-x86_64\
    -i386-64bit
    Running main program from
    with_usercustomize/site_usercustomize.py
    End of path: /Users/dhellmann/python/3.5/Darwin-15.5.0-x86_64\
    -i386-64bit

When the user site directory feature is disabled, :mod:`usercustomize`
is not imported, whether it is located in the user site directory or
elsewhere.

.. NOT RUNNING because virtualenv disables user-site which in turns
.. disables usercustomize.

.. code-block:: none

	$ PYTHONPATH=with_usercustomize python3 -s with_usercustomize/s\
	ite_usercustomize.py
	
	Running main program from
	with_usercustomize/site_usercustomize.py
	End of path: /Users/dhellmann/Envs/pymotw35/lib/python3.5/site-
	packages


Disabling the site Module
=========================

To maintain backwards-compatibility with versions of Python from
before the automatic import was added, the interpreter accepts an
``-S`` option.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, '-S site_import_path.py', line_cleanups=[]))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 -S site_import_path.py
	
	Path prefixes:
	   /Users/dhellmann/Envs/pymotw35/bin/..
	   /Users/dhellmann/Envs/pymotw35/bin/..
	
	/Users/dhellmann/Envs/pymotw35/bin/..
	
	  lib/python3.5/site-packages
	   exists : True
	   in path: False
	
	  lib/site-python
	   exists : False
	   in path: False

.. {{{end}}}

.. seealso::

   * :pydoc:`site`

   * :ref:`sys-imports` -- Description of how the import path defined
     in :mod:`sys` works.

   * `Running code at Python startup
     <http://nedbatchelder.com/blog/201001/running_code_at_python_startup.html>`__
     -- Post from Ned Batchelder discussing ways to cause the Python
     interpreter to run custom initialization code before starting the
     main program execution.
