source/compileall/index.rst, before:

==========================================
 compileall --- Byte-compile Source Files
==========================================

.. module:: compileall
    :synopsis: Byte-compile Source Files

:Purpose: Convert source files to byte-compiled version.

The :mod:`compileall` module finds Python source files and compiles
them to the byte-code representation, saving the results in ``.pyc``
or ``.pyo`` files.

Compiling One Directory
=======================

:func:`compile_dir` is used to recursively scan a directory and
byte-compile the files within it.

.. include:: compileall_compile_dir.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

By default, all of the subdirectories are scanned to a depth of 10.

.. {{{cog
.. workdir = path(cog.inFile).dirname()
.. cog.msg('Removing .pyc files from %s' % workdir)
.. sh("find %s -name '*.pyc' | xargs rm" % workdir) #* fix emacs syntax highlighting
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'compileall_compile_dir.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 compileall_compile_dir.py
	
	Listing 'examples'...
	Compiling 'examples/a.py'...
	Listing 'examples/subdir'...
	Compiling 'examples/subdir/b.py'...

.. {{{end}}}

To filter directories out, use the ``rx`` argument to provide a
regular expression to match the names to exclude.

.. include:: compileall_exclude_dirs.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

This version excludes files in the ``subdir`` subdirectory.

.. {{{cog
.. workdir = path(cog.inFile).dirname()
.. cog.msg('Removing .pyc files from %s' % workdir)
.. sh("find %s -name '*.pyc' | xargs rm" % workdir) #* fix emacs syntax highlighting
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'compileall_exclude_dirs.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 compileall_exclude_dirs.py
	
	Listing 'examples'...
	Compiling 'examples/a.py'...
	Listing 'examples/subdir'...

.. {{{end}}}

The *maxlevels* argument controls the depth of recursion.  For example,
to avoid recursion entirely pass ``0``.

.. include:: compileall_recursion_depth.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Only files within the directory passed to :func:`compile_dir` are
compiled.

.. {{{cog
.. workdir = path(cog.inFile).dirname()
.. cog.msg('Removing .pyc files from %s' % workdir)
.. sh("find %s -name '*.pyc' | xargs rm" % workdir) #* fix emacs syntax highlighting
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'compileall_recursion_depth.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 compileall_recursion_depth.py
	
	Listing 'examples'...
	Compiling 'examples/a.py'...

.. {{{end}}}


Compiling sys.path
==================

All of the Python source files found in sys.path can be compiled with
a single call to :func:`compile_path`.

.. include:: compileall_path.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

This example replaces the default contents of :data:`sys.path` to
avoid permission errors while running the script, but still
illustrates the default behavior.  Note that the *maxlevels* value
defaults to ``0``.

.. {{{cog
.. workdir = path(cog.inFile).dirname()
.. cog.msg('Removing .pyc files from %s' % workdir)
.. sh("find %s -name '*.pyc' | xargs rm" % workdir) #* fix emacs syntax highlighting
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'compileall_path.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 compileall_path.py
	
	sys.path = ['examples', 'notthere']
	Listing 'examples'...
	Compiling 'examples/a.py'...
	Listing 'notthere'...
	Can't list 'notthere'

.. {{{end}}}


From the Command Line
=====================

It is also possible to invoke :mod:`compileall` from the command line,
so it can be integrated with a build system via a Makefile.  For
example:

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, '-m compileall -h', ignore_error=True, 
..                    line_break_mode='wrap'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 -m compileall -h
	
	usage: compileall.py [-h] [-l] [-f] [-q] [-b] [-d DESTDIR] [-x
	REGEXP]
	                     [-i FILE]
	                     [FILE|DIR [FILE|DIR ...]]
	
	Utilities to support installing Python libraries.
	
	positional arguments:
	  FILE|DIR    zero or more file and directory names to compile;
	if no
	              arguments given, defaults to the equivalent of -l
	sys.path
	
	optional arguments:
	  -h, --help  show this help message and exit
	  -l          don't recurse into subdirectories
	  -f          force rebuild even if timestamps are up to date
	  -q          output only error messages
	  -b          use legacy (pre-PEP3147) compiled file locations
	  -d DESTDIR  directory to prepend to file paths for use in
	compile-time
	              tracebacks and in runtime tracebacks in cases
	where the source
	              file is unavailable
	  -x REGEXP   skip files matching the regular expression; the
	regexp is
	              searched for in the full path of each file
	considered for
	              compilation
	  -i FILE     add all the files and directories listed in FILE
	to the list
	              considered for compilation; if "-", names are read
	from stdin

.. {{{end}}}

To recreate the earlier example, skipping the ``subdir`` directory, run:

.. {{{cog
.. workdir = path(cog.inFile).dirname()
.. cog.msg('Removing .pyc files from %s' % workdir)
.. sh("find %s -name '*.pyc' | xargs rm" % workdir) #* fix emacs syntax highlighting
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, "-m compileall -x '/subdir' examples"))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 -m compileall -x '/subdir' examples
	
	Listing 'examples'...
	Compiling 'examples/a.py'...
	Listing 'examples/subdir'...

.. {{{end}}}


.. seealso::

    * :pydoc:`compileall`

Commit message:

compileall: show output files in __pycache__ directory
Change-Id: I47179a88db3d05c0394ca53c5e055f200a65efc9

source/compileall/index.rst, after:

==========================================
 compileall --- Byte-compile Source Files
==========================================

.. module:: compileall
    :synopsis: Byte-compile Source Files

:Purpose: Convert source files to byte-compiled version.

The :mod:`compileall` module finds Python source files and compiles
them to the byte-code representation, saving the results in ``.pyc``
or ``.pyo`` files.

Compiling One Directory
=======================

:func:`compile_dir` is used to recursively scan a directory and
byte-compile the files within it.

.. include:: compileall_compile_dir.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

By default, all of the subdirectories are scanned to a depth of 10.
The output files are written to a ``__pycache__`` directory and named
based on the Python interpreter version.

.. {{{cog
.. workdir = path(cog.inFile).dirname()
.. cog.msg('Removing .pyc files from %s' % workdir)
.. sh("find %s -name '*.pyc' | xargs rm" % workdir) #* fix emacs syntax highlighting
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'compileall_compile_dir.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 compileall_compile_dir.py
	
	Before: []
	
	Listing 'examples'...
	Compiling 'examples/a.py'...
	Listing 'examples/subdir'...
	Compiling 'examples/subdir/b.py'...
	
	After: ['examples/__pycache__/a.cpython-34.pyc']

.. {{{end}}}

Ignoring Files
==============

To filter directories out, use the ``rx`` argument to provide a
regular expression to match the names to exclude.

.. include:: compileall_exclude_dirs.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

This version excludes files in the ``subdir`` subdirectory.

.. {{{cog
.. workdir = path(cog.inFile).dirname()
.. cog.msg('Removing .pyc files from %s' % workdir)
.. sh("find %s -name '*.pyc' | xargs rm" % workdir) #* fix emacs syntax highlighting
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'compileall_exclude_dirs.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 compileall_exclude_dirs.py
	
	Listing 'examples'...
	Compiling 'examples/a.py'...
	Listing 'examples/subdir'...

.. {{{end}}}

The *maxlevels* argument controls the depth of recursion.  For example,
to avoid recursion entirely pass ``0``.

.. include:: compileall_recursion_depth.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Only files within the directory passed to :func:`compile_dir` are
compiled.

.. {{{cog
.. workdir = path(cog.inFile).dirname()
.. cog.msg('Removing .pyc files from %s' % workdir)
.. sh("find %s -name '*.pyc' | xargs rm" % workdir) #* fix emacs syntax highlighting
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'compileall_recursion_depth.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 compileall_recursion_depth.py
	
	Listing 'examples'...
	Compiling 'examples/a.py'...

.. {{{end}}}


Compiling sys.path
==================

All of the Python source files found in sys.path can be compiled with
a single call to :func:`compile_path`.

.. include:: compileall_path.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

This example replaces the default contents of :data:`sys.path` to
avoid permission errors while running the script, but still
illustrates the default behavior.  Note that the *maxlevels* value
defaults to ``0``.

.. {{{cog
.. workdir = path(cog.inFile).dirname()
.. cog.msg('Removing .pyc files from %s' % workdir)
.. sh("find %s -name '*.pyc' | xargs rm" % workdir) #* fix emacs syntax highlighting
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'compileall_path.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 compileall_path.py
	
	sys.path = ['examples', 'notthere']
	Listing 'examples'...
	Compiling 'examples/a.py'...
	Listing 'notthere'...
	Can't list 'notthere'

.. {{{end}}}


From the Command Line
=====================

It is also possible to invoke :mod:`compileall` from the command line,
so it can be integrated with a build system via a Makefile.  For
example:

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, '-m compileall -h', ignore_error=True, 
..                    line_break_mode='wrap'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 -m compileall -h
	
	usage: compileall.py [-h] [-l] [-f] [-q] [-b] [-d DESTDIR] [-x
	REGEXP]
	                     [-i FILE]
	                     [FILE|DIR [FILE|DIR ...]]
	
	Utilities to support installing Python libraries.
	
	positional arguments:
	  FILE|DIR    zero or more file and directory names to compile;
	if no
	              arguments given, defaults to the equivalent of -l
	sys.path
	
	optional arguments:
	  -h, --help  show this help message and exit
	  -l          don't recurse into subdirectories
	  -f          force rebuild even if timestamps are up to date
	  -q          output only error messages
	  -b          use legacy (pre-PEP3147) compiled file locations
	  -d DESTDIR  directory to prepend to file paths for use in
	compile-time
	              tracebacks and in runtime tracebacks in cases
	where the source
	              file is unavailable
	  -x REGEXP   skip files matching the regular expression; the
	regexp is
	              searched for in the full path of each file
	considered for
	              compilation
	  -i FILE     add all the files and directories listed in FILE
	to the list
	              considered for compilation; if "-", names are read
	from stdin

.. {{{end}}}

To recreate the earlier example, skipping the ``subdir`` directory, run:

.. {{{cog
.. workdir = path(cog.inFile).dirname()
.. cog.msg('Removing .pyc files from %s' % workdir)
.. sh("find %s -name '*.pyc' | xargs rm" % workdir) #* fix emacs syntax highlighting
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, "-m compileall -x '/subdir' examples"))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 -m compileall -x '/subdir' examples
	
	Listing 'examples'...
	Compiling 'examples/a.py'...
	Listing 'examples/subdir'...

.. {{{end}}}


.. seealso::

    * :pydoc:`compileall`
