source/logging/index.rst, before:

==============================================================
 logging --- Report Status, Error, and Informational Messages
==============================================================

.. module:: logging
    :synopsis: Report status, error, and informational messages.

:Purpose: Report status, error, and informational messages.

The ``logging`` module defines a standard API for reporting errors
and status information from applications and libraries. The key
benefit of having the logging API provided by a standard library
module is that all Python modules can participate in logging, so an
application's log can include messages from third-party modules.

Logging Components
==================

The logging system is made up of four interacting types of
objects. Each module or application that wants to log uses a
``Logger`` instance to add information to the logs. Invoking the
logger creates a ``LogRecord``, which is used to hold the
information in memory until it is processed. A ``Logger`` may
have a number of ``Handler`` objects configured to receive and
process log records. The ``Handler`` uses a ``Formatter`` to
turn the log records into output messages.

Logging in Applications vs. Libraries
=====================================

Application developers and library authors can both use
``logging``, but each audience has different considerations to keep
in mind.

Application developers configure the ``logging`` module, directing
the messages to appropriate output channels.  It is possible to log
messages with different verbosity levels or to different
destinations. Handlers for writing log messages to files, HTTP
GET/POST locations, email via SMTP, generic sockets, or OS-specific
logging mechanisms are all included, and it is possible to create
custom log destination classes for special requirements not handled by
any of the built-in classes.

Developers of libraries can also use ``logging`` and have even less
work to do.  Simply create a logger instance for each context, using
an appropriate name, and then log messages using the standard levels.
As long as a library uses the logging API with consistent naming and
level selections, the application can be configured to show or hide
messages from the library, as desired.

Logging to a File
=================

Most applications are configured to log to a file. Use the
``basicConfig()`` function to set up the default handler so that
debug messages are written to a file.

.. literalinclude:: logging_file_example.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

After running the script, the log message is written to
``logging_example.out``:

.. {{{cog
.. run_script(cog.inFile, 'rm -f logging_*.out', interpreter='')
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'logging_file_example.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 logging_file_example.py
	
	FILE:
	DEBUG:root:This message should go to the log file
	

.. {{{end}}}

Rotating Log Files
==================

Running the script repeatedly causes more messages to be appended to
the file. To create a new file each time the program runs, pass a
``filemode`` argument to ``basicConfig()`` with a value of
``'w'``. Rather than managing the creation of files this way, though,
it is better to use a ``RotatingFileHandler``, which creates new
files automatically and preserves the old log file at the same time.

.. literalinclude:: logging_rotatingfile_example.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The result is six separate files, each with part of the log
history for the application.

.. {{{cog
.. run_script(cog.inFile, 'rm -f logging_*.out*', interpreter='')
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'logging_rotatingfile_example.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 logging_rotatingfile_example.py
	
	logging_rotatingfile_example.out
	logging_rotatingfile_example.out.1
	logging_rotatingfile_example.out.2
	logging_rotatingfile_example.out.3
	logging_rotatingfile_example.out.4
	logging_rotatingfile_example.out.5

.. {{{end}}}

The most current file is always ``logging_rotatingfile_example.out``, and
each time it reaches the size limit it is renamed with the suffix ``.1``. Each of
the existing backup files is renamed to increment the suffix (``.1`` becomes ``.2``,
etc.) and the ``.5`` file is erased.

.. note::

  Obviously, this example sets the log length much too small as an
  extreme example. Set ``maxBytes`` to a more appropriate value in a
  real program.

Verbosity Levels
================

Another useful feature of the ``logging`` API is the ability to
produce different messages at different *log levels*. This means code
can be instrumented with debug messages, for example, and the log
level can be set so that those debug messages are not written on a
production system.  :table:`Logging Levels` lists the logging levels
defined by ``logging``.

.. table:: Logging Levels

   ========  =====
   Level     Value
   ========  =====
   CRITICAL  50
   ERROR     40
   WARNING   30
   INFO      20
   DEBUG     10
   UNSET      0
   ========  =====

The log message is only emitted if the handler and logger are
configured to emit messages of that level or higher. For example, if a
message is ``CRITICAL``, and the logger is set to ``ERROR``,
the message is emitted (50 > 40). If a message is a ``WARNING``,
and the logger is set to produce only messages set to ``ERROR``,
the message is not emitted (30 < 40).

.. literalinclude:: logging_level_example.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Run the script with an argument like 'debug' or 'warning' to see which
messages show up at different levels:

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'logging_level_example.py debug'))
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'logging_level_example.py info', include_prefix=False))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 logging_level_example.py debug
	
	DEBUG:root:This is a debug message
	INFO:root:This is an info message
	WARNING:root:This is a warning message
	ERROR:root:This is an error message
	CRITICAL:root:This is a critical error message

	$ python3 logging_level_example.py info
	
	INFO:root:This is an info message
	WARNING:root:This is a warning message
	ERROR:root:This is an error message
	CRITICAL:root:This is a critical error message

.. {{{end}}}

Naming Logger Instances
=======================

All of the previous log messages all have 'root' embedded in them
because the code uses the root logger.  An easy way to tell where a
specific log message comes from is to use a separate logger object for
each module. Log messages sent to a logger include the name of that
logger. Here is an example of how to log from different modules so it
is easy to trace the source of the message.

.. literalinclude:: logging_modules_example.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The output shows the different module names for each output line.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'logging_modules_example.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 logging_modules_example.py
	
	WARNING:package1.module1:This message comes from one module
	WARNING:package2.module2:This comes from another module

.. {{{end}}}

The Logging Tree
================

The ``Logger`` instances are configured in a tree structure,
based on their names. Typically each application or library defines a
base name, with loggers for individual modules set as children. The
root logger has no name.

.. graphviz:: logger_tree.dot
   :caption: logging: Example Logger Tree

The tree structure is useful for configuring logging because it means
each logger does not need its own set of handlers. If a logger does
not have any handlers, the message is handed to its parent for
processing. This means that for most applications it is only necessary
to configure handlers on the root logger, and all log information will
be collected and sent to the same place.

.. graphviz:: logger_tree_handler.dot
   :caption: logging: One Logging Handler

The tree structure also allows different verbosity levels, handlers,
and formatters to be set for different parts of the application or
library to control which messages are logged and where they go.

.. graphviz:: logger_tree_multihandler.dot
   :caption: logging: Different Levels and Handlers

Integration with the warnings Module
====================================

The logging module integrates with :mod:`warnings` through
``captureWarnings()``, which configures ``warnings`` to send
messages through the logging system instead of outputting them
directly.

.. literalinclude:: logging_capture_warnings.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The warning message is sent to a logger named ``py.warnings`` using
the ``WARNING`` level.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'logging_capture_warnings.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 logging_capture_warnings.py
	
	logging_capture_warnings.py:13: UserWarning: This warning is not
	 sent to the logs
	  warnings.warn('This warning is not sent to the logs')
	WARNING:py.warnings:logging_capture_warnings.py:17: UserWarning:
	 This warning is sent to the logs
	  warnings.warn('This warning is sent to the logs')
	

.. {{{end}}}

.. seealso::

   * :pydoc:`logging` -- The documentation for ``logging`` is
     extensive, and includes tutorials and reference material that
     goes beyond the exmaples presented here.

   * :ref:`Porting notes for logging <porting-logging>`

   * :mod:`warnings` -- Non-fatal alerts.

   * `logging_tree <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/logging_tree>`__ --
     Third-party package by Brandon Rhodes for showing the logger tree
     for an application.

   * `Logging Cookbook
     <https://docs.python.org/3.5/howto/logging-cookbook.html>`__ --
     Part of the standard library documentation, with examples of
     using ``logging`` for different tasks.

Commit message:

logging: fix figure captions and insert references
Add references to the figures included in the logging chapter.

source/logging/index.rst, after:

==============================================================
 logging --- Report Status, Error, and Informational Messages
==============================================================

.. module:: logging
    :synopsis: Report status, error, and informational messages.

:Purpose: Report status, error, and informational messages.

The ``logging`` module defines a standard API for reporting errors
and status information from applications and libraries. The key
benefit of having the logging API provided by a standard library
module is that all Python modules can participate in logging, so an
application's log can include messages from third-party modules.

Logging Components
==================

The logging system is made up of four interacting types of
objects. Each module or application that wants to log uses a
``Logger`` instance to add information to the logs. Invoking the
logger creates a ``LogRecord``, which is used to hold the
information in memory until it is processed. A ``Logger`` may
have a number of ``Handler`` objects configured to receive and
process log records. The ``Handler`` uses a ``Formatter`` to
turn the log records into output messages.

Logging in Applications vs. Libraries
=====================================

Application developers and library authors can both use
``logging``, but each audience has different considerations to keep
in mind.

Application developers configure the ``logging`` module, directing
the messages to appropriate output channels.  It is possible to log
messages with different verbosity levels or to different
destinations. Handlers for writing log messages to files, HTTP
GET/POST locations, email via SMTP, generic sockets, or OS-specific
logging mechanisms are all included, and it is possible to create
custom log destination classes for special requirements not handled by
any of the built-in classes.

Developers of libraries can also use ``logging`` and have even less
work to do.  Simply create a logger instance for each context, using
an appropriate name, and then log messages using the standard levels.
As long as a library uses the logging API with consistent naming and
level selections, the application can be configured to show or hide
messages from the library, as desired.

Logging to a File
=================

Most applications are configured to log to a file. Use the
``basicConfig()`` function to set up the default handler so that
debug messages are written to a file.

.. literalinclude:: logging_file_example.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

After running the script, the log message is written to
``logging_example.out``:

.. {{{cog
.. run_script(cog.inFile, 'rm -f logging_*.out', interpreter='')
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'logging_file_example.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 logging_file_example.py
	
	FILE:
	DEBUG:root:This message should go to the log file
	

.. {{{end}}}

Rotating Log Files
==================

Running the script repeatedly causes more messages to be appended to
the file. To create a new file each time the program runs, pass a
``filemode`` argument to ``basicConfig()`` with a value of
``'w'``. Rather than managing the creation of files this way, though,
it is better to use a ``RotatingFileHandler``, which creates new
files automatically and preserves the old log file at the same time.

.. literalinclude:: logging_rotatingfile_example.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The result is six separate files, each with part of the log
history for the application.

.. {{{cog
.. run_script(cog.inFile, 'rm -f logging_*.out*', interpreter='')
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'logging_rotatingfile_example.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 logging_rotatingfile_example.py
	
	logging_rotatingfile_example.out
	logging_rotatingfile_example.out.1
	logging_rotatingfile_example.out.2
	logging_rotatingfile_example.out.3
	logging_rotatingfile_example.out.4
	logging_rotatingfile_example.out.5

.. {{{end}}}

The most current file is always ``logging_rotatingfile_example.out``, and
each time it reaches the size limit it is renamed with the suffix ``.1``. Each of
the existing backup files is renamed to increment the suffix (``.1`` becomes ``.2``,
etc.) and the ``.5`` file is erased.

.. note::

  Obviously, this example sets the log length much too small as an
  extreme example. Set ``maxBytes`` to a more appropriate value in a
  real program.

Verbosity Levels
================

Another useful feature of the ``logging`` API is the ability to
produce different messages at different *log levels*. This means code
can be instrumented with debug messages, for example, and the log
level can be set so that those debug messages are not written on a
production system.  :table:`Logging Levels` lists the logging levels
defined by ``logging``.

.. table:: Logging Levels

   ========  =====
   Level     Value
   ========  =====
   CRITICAL  50
   ERROR     40
   WARNING   30
   INFO      20
   DEBUG     10
   UNSET      0
   ========  =====

The log message is only emitted if the handler and logger are
configured to emit messages of that level or higher. For example, if a
message is ``CRITICAL``, and the logger is set to ``ERROR``,
the message is emitted (50 > 40). If a message is a ``WARNING``,
and the logger is set to produce only messages set to ``ERROR``,
the message is not emitted (30 < 40).

.. literalinclude:: logging_level_example.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Run the script with an argument like 'debug' or 'warning' to see which
messages show up at different levels:

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'logging_level_example.py debug'))
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'logging_level_example.py info', include_prefix=False))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 logging_level_example.py debug
	
	DEBUG:root:This is a debug message
	INFO:root:This is an info message
	WARNING:root:This is a warning message
	ERROR:root:This is an error message
	CRITICAL:root:This is a critical error message

	$ python3 logging_level_example.py info
	
	INFO:root:This is an info message
	WARNING:root:This is a warning message
	ERROR:root:This is an error message
	CRITICAL:root:This is a critical error message

.. {{{end}}}

Naming Logger Instances
=======================

All of the previous log messages all have 'root' embedded in them
because the code uses the root logger.  An easy way to tell where a
specific log message comes from is to use a separate logger object for
each module. Log messages sent to a logger include the name of that
logger. Here is an example of how to log from different modules so it
is easy to trace the source of the message.

.. literalinclude:: logging_modules_example.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The output shows the different module names for each output line.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'logging_modules_example.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 logging_modules_example.py
	
	WARNING:package1.module1:This message comes from one module
	WARNING:package2.module2:This comes from another module

.. {{{end}}}

The Logging Tree
================

The ``Logger`` instances are configured in a tree structure, based on
their names, as illustrated in :figure:`Example Logger
Tree`. Typically each application or library defines a base name, with
loggers for individual modules set as children. The root logger has no
name.

.. graphviz:: logger_tree.dot
   :caption: Example Logger Tree

The tree structure is useful for configuring logging because it means
each logger does not need its own set of handlers. If a logger does
not have any handlers, the message is handed to its parent for
processing. This means that for most applications it is only necessary
to configure handlers on the root logger, and all log information will
be collected and sent to the same place, as shown in :figure:`One
Logging Handler`.

.. graphviz:: logger_tree_handler.dot
   :caption: One Logging Handler

The tree structure also allows different verbosity levels, handlers,
and formatters to be set for different parts of the application or
library to control which messages are logged and where they go, as in
:figure:`Different Levels and Handlers`.

.. graphviz:: logger_tree_multihandler.dot
   :caption: Different Levels and Handlers

Integration with the warnings Module
====================================

The logging module integrates with :mod:`warnings` through
``captureWarnings()``, which configures ``warnings`` to send
messages through the logging system instead of outputting them
directly.

.. literalinclude:: logging_capture_warnings.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The warning message is sent to a logger named ``py.warnings`` using
the ``WARNING`` level.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'logging_capture_warnings.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 logging_capture_warnings.py
	
	logging_capture_warnings.py:13: UserWarning: This warning is not
	 sent to the logs
	  warnings.warn('This warning is not sent to the logs')
	WARNING:py.warnings:logging_capture_warnings.py:17: UserWarning:
	 This warning is sent to the logs
	  warnings.warn('This warning is sent to the logs')
	

.. {{{end}}}

.. seealso::

   * :pydoc:`logging` -- The documentation for ``logging`` is
     extensive, and includes tutorials and reference material that
     goes beyond the exmaples presented here.

   * :ref:`Porting notes for logging <porting-logging>`

   * :mod:`warnings` -- Non-fatal alerts.

   * `logging_tree <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/logging_tree>`__ --
     Third-party package by Brandon Rhodes for showing the logger tree
     for an application.

   * `Logging Cookbook
     <https://docs.python.org/3.5/howto/logging-cookbook.html>`__ --
     Part of the standard library documentation, with examples of
     using ``logging`` for different tasks.
