source/asyncio/echo_protocol.rst, before:

========================================================
 An Echo Server and Client Using the Class Abstractions
========================================================

This section examines two sample programs implementing a simple echo
server and client, similar to the examples used in the :mod:`socket`
and :mod:`socketserver` sections. A client can connect to the server,
send some data, and then receive the same data as a response.

Server
======

The server starts by importing the modules it needs to set up
:mod:`asyncio` and :mod:`logging`, and then it creates an event loop
object.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_protocol.py
   :lines: 9-14,44-51

It then defines a subclass of :class:`asyncio.Protocol` to handle
client communication. The protocol object's methods are invoked based
on events associated with the server socket.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_protocol.py
   :lines: 16

Each new client connection triggers a call to
:func:`connection_made`. The transport argument is an instance of
:class:`asyncio.Transport`, which provides an abstraction for doing
asynchronous I/O using the socket. Different types of communication
provide different transport implementations, all with the same
API. For example, there are separate transport classes for working
with sockets and for working with pipes to subprocesses. The address
of the incoming client is available from the transport through
:func:`get_extra_info`, an implementation-specific method.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_protocol.py
   :lines: 18-24

After a connection is established, when data is sent from the client
to the server the :func:`data_received` method of the protocol is
invoked to pass the data in for processing. Data is passed as a byte
string, and it is up to the application to decode it in an appropriate
way. Here the results are logged, and then a response is sent back to
the client immediately by calling ``transport.write()``.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_protocol.py
   :lines: 26-29

Some transports support a special end-of-file indicator ("EOF"). When
an EOF is encountered, the :func:`eof_received` method is called. In
this implementation, the EOF is sent back to the client to indicate
that it was received. Because not all transports support an explicit
EOF, this protocol asks the transport first whether it is safe to send
EOF.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_protocol.py
   :lines: 31-34

When a connection is closed, either normally or as the result of an
error, the protocol's :func:`connection_lost` method is called. If
there was an error, the argument contains an appropriate exception
object. Otherwise it is ``None``.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_protocol.py
   :lines: 36-41

There are two steps to starting the server. First the application
tells the event loop to create a new server object using the protocol
class and the hostname and socket on which to listen. The
:func:`create_server` method is a coroutine, so the results must be
processed by the event loop in order to actually start the
server. Completing the coroutine produces a :class:`asyncio.Server`
instance tied to the event loop.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_protocol.py
   :lines: 53-57

Then the event loop needs to be run in order to process events and
handle client requests. For a long-running service, the
:func:`run_forever` method is the simplest way to do this.  When the
event loop is stopped, either by the application code or by signaling
the process, the server can be closed to clean up the socket properly,
and then the event loop can be closed to finish handling any other
coroutines before the program exits.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_protocol.py
   :lines: 59-

Client
======

Constructing a client using a protocol class is very similar to
constructing a server.  The code again starts by importing the modules
it needs to set up :mod:`asyncio` and :mod:`logging`, and then
creating an event loop object.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_protocol.py
   :lines: 9-20,61-68

The client protocol class defines the same methods as the server, with
different implementations. The class constructor accepts two
arguments, a list of the messages to send and a :class:`Future`
instance to use to signal that the client has completed a cycle of
work by receiving a response from the server.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_protocol.py
   :lines: 22-28

When the client successfully connects to the server, it starts
communicating immediately.  The sequence of messages is sent one at a
time, although the underlying networking code may combine multiple
messages into one transmission. When all of the messages are
exhausted, an EOF is sent.

Although it appears that the data is all being sent immediately, in
fact the transport object buffers the outgoing data and sets up a
callback to actually transmit when the socket's buffer is ready to
receive data. This is all handled transparently, so the application
code can be written as though the I/O operation is happening right
away.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_protocol.py
   :lines: 30-43

When the response from the server is received, it is logged.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_protocol.py
   :lines: 45-46

And when either an end-of-file marker is received or the connection is
closed from the server's side, the local transport object is closed
and the future object is marked as done by setting a result.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_protocol.py
   :lines: 48-59

Normally the protocol class is passed to the event loop to create the
connection. In this case, because the event loop has no facility for
passing extra arguments to the protocol constructor, it is necessary
to create a *partial* to wrap the client class and pass the list of
messages to send and the :class:`Future` instance. That new callable
is then used in place of the class when calling
:func:`create_connection` to establish the client connection.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_protocol.py
   :lines: 71-81

To trigger the client to run, the event loop is called once with the
coroutine for creating the client and then again with the
:class:`Future` instance given to the client to communicate when it is
finished. Using two calls like this avoids having an infinite loop in
the client program, which likely wants to exit after it has finished
communicating with the server.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_protocol.py
   :lines: 83-

Output
======

Running the server in one window and the client in another produces
the following output.

::

    $ python3 asyncio_echo_client_protocol.py
    asyncio: Using selector: KqueueSelector
    main: waiting for client to complete
    EchoClient: connecting to ::1 port 10000
    EchoClient: sending b'This is the message. '
    EchoClient: sending b'It will be sent '
    EchoClient: sending b'in parts.'
    EchoClient: received b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    EchoClient: received EOF
    EchoClient: server closed connection
    main: closing event loop

    $ python3 asyncio_echo_client_protocol.py
    asyncio: Using selector: KqueueSelector
    main: waiting for client to complete
    EchoClient: connecting to ::1 port 10000
    EchoClient: sending b'This is the message. '
    EchoClient: sending b'It will be sent '
    EchoClient: sending b'in parts.'
    EchoClient: received b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    EchoClient: received EOF
    EchoClient: server closed connection
    main: closing event loop

    $ python3 asyncio_echo_client_protocol.py
    asyncio: Using selector: KqueueSelector
    main: waiting for client to complete
    EchoClient: connecting to ::1 port 10000
    EchoClient: sending b'This is the message. '
    EchoClient: sending b'It will be sent '
    EchoClient: sending b'in parts.'
    EchoClient: received b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    EchoClient: received EOF
    EchoClient: server closed connection
    main: closing event loop

Although the client always sends the messages separately, the first
time the client runs the server receives one large message and echoes
that back to the client. These results vary in subsequent runs, based
on how busy the network is and whether the socket is flushed before
all of the data is prepared.

::

    $ python3 asyncio_echo_server_protocol.py
    asyncio: Using selector: KqueueSelector
    main: starting up on localhost port 10000
    EchoServer_::1_63347: connection accepted
    EchoServer_::1_63347: received b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    EchoServer_::1_63347: sent b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    EchoServer_::1_63347: received EOF
    EchoServer_::1_63347: closing

    EchoServer_::1_63387: connection accepted
    EchoServer_::1_63387: received b'This is the message. '
    EchoServer_::1_63387: sent b'This is the message. '
    EchoServer_::1_63387: received b'It will be sent in parts.'
    EchoServer_::1_63387: sent b'It will be sent in parts.'
    EchoServer_::1_63387: received EOF
    EchoServer_::1_63387: closing

    EchoServer_::1_63389: connection accepted
    EchoServer_::1_63389: received b'This is the message. It will be sent '
    EchoServer_::1_63389: sent b'This is the message. It will be sent '
    EchoServer_::1_63389: received b'in parts.'
    EchoServer_::1_63389: sent b'in parts.'
    EchoServer_::1_63389: received EOF
    EchoServer_::1_63389: closing

Commit message:

asyncio: clarify the difference in event loop use between protocol and coroutine clients

source/asyncio/echo_protocol.rst, after:

========================================================
 An Echo Server and Client Using the Class Abstractions
========================================================

This section examines two sample programs implementing a simple echo
server and client, similar to the examples used in the :mod:`socket`
and :mod:`socketserver` sections. A client can connect to the server,
send some data, and then receive the same data as a response.

Server
======

The server starts by importing the modules it needs to set up
:mod:`asyncio` and :mod:`logging`, and then it creates an event loop
object.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_protocol.py
   :lines: 9-14,44-51

It then defines a subclass of :class:`asyncio.Protocol` to handle
client communication. The protocol object's methods are invoked based
on events associated with the server socket.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_protocol.py
   :lines: 16

Each new client connection triggers a call to
:func:`connection_made`. The transport argument is an instance of
:class:`asyncio.Transport`, which provides an abstraction for doing
asynchronous I/O using the socket. Different types of communication
provide different transport implementations, all with the same
API. For example, there are separate transport classes for working
with sockets and for working with pipes to subprocesses. The address
of the incoming client is available from the transport through
:func:`get_extra_info`, an implementation-specific method.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_protocol.py
   :lines: 18-24

After a connection is established, when data is sent from the client
to the server the :func:`data_received` method of the protocol is
invoked to pass the data in for processing. Data is passed as a byte
string, and it is up to the application to decode it in an appropriate
way. Here the results are logged, and then a response is sent back to
the client immediately by calling ``transport.write()``.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_protocol.py
   :lines: 26-29

Some transports support a special end-of-file indicator ("EOF"). When
an EOF is encountered, the :func:`eof_received` method is called. In
this implementation, the EOF is sent back to the client to indicate
that it was received. Because not all transports support an explicit
EOF, this protocol asks the transport first whether it is safe to send
EOF.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_protocol.py
   :lines: 31-34

When a connection is closed, either normally or as the result of an
error, the protocol's :func:`connection_lost` method is called. If
there was an error, the argument contains an appropriate exception
object. Otherwise it is ``None``.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_protocol.py
   :lines: 36-41

There are two steps to starting the server. First the application
tells the event loop to create a new server object using the protocol
class and the hostname and socket on which to listen. The
:func:`create_server` method is a coroutine, so the results must be
processed by the event loop in order to actually start the
server. Completing the coroutine produces a :class:`asyncio.Server`
instance tied to the event loop.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_protocol.py
   :lines: 53-57

Then the event loop needs to be run in order to process events and
handle client requests. For a long-running service, the
:func:`run_forever` method is the simplest way to do this.  When the
event loop is stopped, either by the application code or by signaling
the process, the server can be closed to clean up the socket properly,
and then the event loop can be closed to finish handling any other
coroutines before the program exits.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_protocol.py
   :lines: 59-

Client
======

Constructing a client using a protocol class is very similar to
constructing a server.  The code again starts by importing the modules
it needs to set up :mod:`asyncio` and :mod:`logging`, and then
creating an event loop object.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_protocol.py
   :lines: 9-20,61-68

The client protocol class defines the same methods as the server, with
different implementations. The class constructor accepts two
arguments, a list of the messages to send and a :class:`Future`
instance to use to signal that the client has completed a cycle of
work by receiving a response from the server.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_protocol.py
   :lines: 22-28

When the client successfully connects to the server, it starts
communicating immediately.  The sequence of messages is sent one at a
time, although the underlying networking code may combine multiple
messages into one transmission. When all of the messages are
exhausted, an EOF is sent.

Although it appears that the data is all being sent immediately, in
fact the transport object buffers the outgoing data and sets up a
callback to actually transmit when the socket's buffer is ready to
receive data. This is all handled transparently, so the application
code can be written as though the I/O operation is happening right
away.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_protocol.py
   :lines: 30-43

When the response from the server is received, it is logged.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_protocol.py
   :lines: 45-46

And when either an end-of-file marker is received or the connection is
closed from the server's side, the local transport object is closed
and the future object is marked as done by setting a result.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_protocol.py
   :lines: 48-59

Normally the protocol class is passed to the event loop to create the
connection. In this case, because the event loop has no facility for
passing extra arguments to the protocol constructor, it is necessary
to create a *partial* to wrap the client class and pass the list of
messages to send and the :class:`Future` instance. That new callable
is then used in place of the class when calling
:func:`create_connection` to establish the client connection.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_protocol.py
   :lines: 71-81

To trigger the client to run, the event loop is called once with the
coroutine for creating the client and then again with the
:class:`Future` instance given to the client to communicate when it is
finished. Using two calls like this avoids having an infinite loop in
the client program, which likely wants to exit after it has finished
communicating with the server. If only the first call was used to wait
for the coroutine to create the client, it might not process all of
the response data and clean up the connection to the server properly.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_protocol.py
   :lines: 83-

Output
======

Running the server in one window and the client in another produces
the following output.

::

    $ python3 asyncio_echo_client_protocol.py
    asyncio: Using selector: KqueueSelector
    main: waiting for client to complete
    EchoClient: connecting to ::1 port 10000
    EchoClient: sending b'This is the message. '
    EchoClient: sending b'It will be sent '
    EchoClient: sending b'in parts.'
    EchoClient: received b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    EchoClient: received EOF
    EchoClient: server closed connection
    main: closing event loop

    $ python3 asyncio_echo_client_protocol.py
    asyncio: Using selector: KqueueSelector
    main: waiting for client to complete
    EchoClient: connecting to ::1 port 10000
    EchoClient: sending b'This is the message. '
    EchoClient: sending b'It will be sent '
    EchoClient: sending b'in parts.'
    EchoClient: received b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    EchoClient: received EOF
    EchoClient: server closed connection
    main: closing event loop

    $ python3 asyncio_echo_client_protocol.py
    asyncio: Using selector: KqueueSelector
    main: waiting for client to complete
    EchoClient: connecting to ::1 port 10000
    EchoClient: sending b'This is the message. '
    EchoClient: sending b'It will be sent '
    EchoClient: sending b'in parts.'
    EchoClient: received b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    EchoClient: received EOF
    EchoClient: server closed connection
    main: closing event loop

Although the client always sends the messages separately, the first
time the client runs the server receives one large message and echoes
that back to the client. These results vary in subsequent runs, based
on how busy the network is and whether the socket is flushed before
all of the data is prepared.

::

    $ python3 asyncio_echo_server_protocol.py
    asyncio: Using selector: KqueueSelector
    main: starting up on localhost port 10000
    EchoServer_::1_63347: connection accepted
    EchoServer_::1_63347: received b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    EchoServer_::1_63347: sent b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    EchoServer_::1_63347: received EOF
    EchoServer_::1_63347: closing

    EchoServer_::1_63387: connection accepted
    EchoServer_::1_63387: received b'This is the message. '
    EchoServer_::1_63387: sent b'This is the message. '
    EchoServer_::1_63387: received b'It will be sent in parts.'
    EchoServer_::1_63387: sent b'It will be sent in parts.'
    EchoServer_::1_63387: received EOF
    EchoServer_::1_63387: closing

    EchoServer_::1_63389: connection accepted
    EchoServer_::1_63389: received b'This is the message. It will be sent '
    EchoServer_::1_63389: sent b'This is the message. It will be sent '
    EchoServer_::1_63389: received b'in parts.'
    EchoServer_::1_63389: sent b'in parts.'
    EchoServer_::1_63389: received EOF
    EchoServer_::1_63389: closing
