source/asyncio/echo_coroutine.rst, before:

========================================================
 An Echo Server and Client Using Coroutines and Streams
========================================================

This section examines alternate versions of the two sample programs
implementing a simple echo server and client, using coroutines and the
:mod:`asyncio` streams API instead of the protocol and transport class
abstractions.

Server
======

The server starts by importing the modules it needs to set up
:mod:`asyncio` and :mod:`logging`, and then it creates an event loop
object.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_coroutine.py
   :lines: 9-13

It then defines a coroutine to handle communication. Each time a
client connects, a new instance of the coroutine will be invoked so
that within the function the code is only communicating with one
client at a time. Python's language runtime manages the state for each
coroutine instance, so the application code does not need to manage
any extra data structures to track separate clients.

The arguments to the coroutine are :class:`StreamReader` and
:class:`StreamWriter` instances associated with the new connection. As
with the :class:`Transport`, the client address can be accessed
through the writer's method :func:`get_extra_info`.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_coroutine.py
   :lines: 16-19

Although the coroutine is called when the connection is established,
there may not be any data to read, yet. To avoid blocking while
reading, the coroutine uses ``await`` with the :func:`read` call to
allow the event loop to carry on processing other tasks until there is
data to read.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_coroutine.py
   :lines: 20-21

If the client sends data, it is returned from ``await`` and can be
sent back to the client by passing it to the writer. Multiple calls to
:func:`write` can be used to buffer outgoing data, and then
:func:`drain` is used to flush the results. Since flushing network I/O
can block, again ``await`` is used to restore control to the event
loop, which monitors the write socket and invokes the writer when it
is possible to send more data.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_coroutine.py
   :lines: 22-26

If the client has sent no data, :func:`read` returns an empty byte
string to indicate that the connection is closed. The server needs to
close the socket for writing to the client, and then the coroutine can
return to indicate that it is finished.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_coroutine.py
   :lines: 27-30

There are two steps to starting the server. First the application
tells the event loop to create a new server object using the coroutine
and the hostname and socket on which to listen. The
:func:`start_server` method is itself a coroutine, so the results must
be processed by the event loop in order to actually start the
server. Completing the coroutine produces a :class:`asyncio.Server`
instance tied to the event loop.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_coroutine.py
   :lines: 43-48

Then the event loop needs to be run in order to process events and
handle client requests. For a long-running service, the
:func:`run_forever` method is the simplest way to do this.  When the
event loop is stopped, either by the application code or by signaling
the process, the server can be closed to clean up the socket properly,
and then the event loop can be closed to finish handling any other
coroutines before the program exits.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_coroutine.py
   :lines: 50-

Client
======

Constructing a client using a coroutine is very similar to
constructing a server.  The code again starts by importing the modules
it needs to set up :mod:`asyncio` and :mod:`logging`, and then
creating an event loop object.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_coroutine.py
   :lines: 9-19,50-57

The ``echo_client`` coroutine takes arguments telling it where the
server is, what messages to send, and which event loop to use.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_coroutine.py
   :lines: 22

The coroutine is called when the task starts, but it has no active
connection to work with. The first step, therefore, is to have the
client establish its own connection. It uses ``await`` to avoid
blocking other activity while the :func:`open_connection` coroutine
runs.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_coroutine.py
   :lines: 24-28

The :func:`open_connection` coroutine returns :class:`StreamReader`
and :class:`StreamWriter` instances associated with the new
socket. The next step is to use the writer to send data to the
server. As in the server, the writer will buffer outgoing data until
the socket is ready or :func:`drain` is used to flush the
results. Since flushing network I/O can block, again ``await`` is used
to restore control to the event loop, which monitors the write socket
and invokes the writer when it is possible to send more data.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_coroutine.py
   :lines: 30-37

Next the client looks for a response from the server by trying to read
data until there is nothing left to read. To avoid blocking on an
individual :func:`read` call, ``await`` yields control back to the
event loop. If the server has sent data, it is logged. If the server
has sent no data, :func:`read` returns an empty byte string to
indicate that the connection is closed. The client needs to close the
socket for sending to the server and then return to indicate that it
is finished.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_coroutine.py
   :lines: 39-47

To start the client, the event loop is called with the coroutine for
creating the client. Using :func:`run_until_complete` avoids having an
infinite loop in the client program.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_coroutine.py
   :lines: 59-

Output
======

Running the server in one window and the client in another produces
the following output.

::

    $ python3 asyncio_echo_client_coroutine.py
    asyncio: Using selector: KqueueSelector
    echo_client: connecting to localhost port 10000
    echo_client: sending b'This is the message. '
    echo_client: sending b'It will be sent '
    echo_client: sending b'in parts.'
    echo_client: waiting for response
    echo_client: received b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    echo_client: closing
    main: closing event loop
    
    $ python3 asyncio_echo_client_coroutine.py
    asyncio: Using selector: KqueueSelector
    echo_client: connecting to localhost port 10000
    echo_client: sending b'This is the message. '
    echo_client: sending b'It will be sent '
    echo_client: sending b'in parts.'
    echo_client: waiting for response
    echo_client: received b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    echo_client: closing
    main: closing event loop
    
    $ python3 asyncio_echo_client_coroutine.py
    asyncio: Using selector: KqueueSelector
    echo_client: connecting to localhost port 10000
    echo_client: sending b'This is the message. '
    echo_client: sending b'It will be sent '
    echo_client: sending b'in parts.'
    echo_client: waiting for response
    echo_client: received b'This is the message. It will be sent '
    echo_client: received b'in parts.'
    echo_client: closing
    main: closing event loop

Although the client always sends the messages separately, the first
two times the client runs the server receives one large message and
echoes that back to the client. These results vary in subsequent runs,
based on how busy the network is and whether the socket is flushed
before all of the data is prepared.

::

    $ python asyncio_echo_server_coroutine.py
    asyncio: Using selector: KqueueSelector
    main: starting up on localhost port 10000
    echo_::1_64624: connection accepted
    echo_::1_64624: received b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    echo_::1_64624: sent b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    echo_::1_64624: closing
    
    echo_::1_64626: connection accepted
    echo_::1_64626: received b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    echo_::1_64626: sent b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    echo_::1_64626: closing
    
    echo_::1_64627: connection accepted
    echo_::1_64627: received b'This is the message. It will be sent '
    echo_::1_64627: sent b'This is the message. It will be sent '
    echo_::1_64627: received b'in parts.'
    echo_::1_64627: sent b'in parts.'
    echo_::1_64627: closing

Commit message:

asyncio: clarify the difference in event loop use between protocol and coroutine clients

source/asyncio/echo_coroutine.rst, after:

========================================================
 An Echo Server and Client Using Coroutines and Streams
========================================================

This section examines alternate versions of the two sample programs
implementing a simple echo server and client, using coroutines and the
:mod:`asyncio` streams API instead of the protocol and transport class
abstractions.

Server
======

The server starts by importing the modules it needs to set up
:mod:`asyncio` and :mod:`logging`, and then it creates an event loop
object.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_coroutine.py
   :lines: 9-13

It then defines a coroutine to handle communication. Each time a
client connects, a new instance of the coroutine will be invoked so
that within the function the code is only communicating with one
client at a time. Python's language runtime manages the state for each
coroutine instance, so the application code does not need to manage
any extra data structures to track separate clients.

The arguments to the coroutine are :class:`StreamReader` and
:class:`StreamWriter` instances associated with the new connection. As
with the :class:`Transport`, the client address can be accessed
through the writer's method :func:`get_extra_info`.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_coroutine.py
   :lines: 16-19

Although the coroutine is called when the connection is established,
there may not be any data to read, yet. To avoid blocking while
reading, the coroutine uses ``await`` with the :func:`read` call to
allow the event loop to carry on processing other tasks until there is
data to read.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_coroutine.py
   :lines: 20-21

If the client sends data, it is returned from ``await`` and can be
sent back to the client by passing it to the writer. Multiple calls to
:func:`write` can be used to buffer outgoing data, and then
:func:`drain` is used to flush the results. Since flushing network I/O
can block, again ``await`` is used to restore control to the event
loop, which monitors the write socket and invokes the writer when it
is possible to send more data.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_coroutine.py
   :lines: 22-26

If the client has sent no data, :func:`read` returns an empty byte
string to indicate that the connection is closed. The server needs to
close the socket for writing to the client, and then the coroutine can
return to indicate that it is finished.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_coroutine.py
   :lines: 27-30

There are two steps to starting the server. First the application
tells the event loop to create a new server object using the coroutine
and the hostname and socket on which to listen. The
:func:`start_server` method is itself a coroutine, so the results must
be processed by the event loop in order to actually start the
server. Completing the coroutine produces a :class:`asyncio.Server`
instance tied to the event loop.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_coroutine.py
   :lines: 43-48

Then the event loop needs to be run in order to process events and
handle client requests. For a long-running service, the
:func:`run_forever` method is the simplest way to do this.  When the
event loop is stopped, either by the application code or by signaling
the process, the server can be closed to clean up the socket properly,
and then the event loop can be closed to finish handling any other
coroutines before the program exits.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_server_coroutine.py
   :lines: 50-

Client
======

Constructing a client using a coroutine is very similar to
constructing a server.  The code again starts by importing the modules
it needs to set up :mod:`asyncio` and :mod:`logging`, and then
creating an event loop object.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_coroutine.py
   :lines: 9-19,50-57

The ``echo_client`` coroutine takes arguments telling it where the
server is, what messages to send, and which event loop to use.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_coroutine.py
   :lines: 22

The coroutine is called when the task starts, but it has no active
connection to work with. The first step, therefore, is to have the
client establish its own connection. It uses ``await`` to avoid
blocking other activity while the :func:`open_connection` coroutine
runs.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_coroutine.py
   :lines: 24-28

The :func:`open_connection` coroutine returns :class:`StreamReader`
and :class:`StreamWriter` instances associated with the new
socket. The next step is to use the writer to send data to the
server. As in the server, the writer will buffer outgoing data until
the socket is ready or :func:`drain` is used to flush the
results. Since flushing network I/O can block, again ``await`` is used
to restore control to the event loop, which monitors the write socket
and invokes the writer when it is possible to send more data.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_coroutine.py
   :lines: 30-37

Next the client looks for a response from the server by trying to read
data until there is nothing left to read. To avoid blocking on an
individual :func:`read` call, ``await`` yields control back to the
event loop. If the server has sent data, it is logged. If the server
has sent no data, :func:`read` returns an empty byte string to
indicate that the connection is closed. The client needs to close the
socket for sending to the server and then return to indicate that it
is finished.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_coroutine.py
   :lines: 39-47

To start the client, the event loop is called with the coroutine for
creating the client. Using :func:`run_until_complete` avoids having an
infinite loop in the client program. Unlike in the protocol example,
no separate future is needed to signal when the coroutine is finished,
because :func:`echo_client` contains all of the client logic itself
and it does not return until it has received a response and closed the
server connection.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_echo_client_coroutine.py
   :lines: 59-

Output
======

Running the server in one window and the client in another produces
the following output.

::

    $ python3 asyncio_echo_client_coroutine.py
    asyncio: Using selector: KqueueSelector
    echo_client: connecting to localhost port 10000
    echo_client: sending b'This is the message. '
    echo_client: sending b'It will be sent '
    echo_client: sending b'in parts.'
    echo_client: waiting for response
    echo_client: received b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    echo_client: closing
    main: closing event loop
    
    $ python3 asyncio_echo_client_coroutine.py
    asyncio: Using selector: KqueueSelector
    echo_client: connecting to localhost port 10000
    echo_client: sending b'This is the message. '
    echo_client: sending b'It will be sent '
    echo_client: sending b'in parts.'
    echo_client: waiting for response
    echo_client: received b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    echo_client: closing
    main: closing event loop
    
    $ python3 asyncio_echo_client_coroutine.py
    asyncio: Using selector: KqueueSelector
    echo_client: connecting to localhost port 10000
    echo_client: sending b'This is the message. '
    echo_client: sending b'It will be sent '
    echo_client: sending b'in parts.'
    echo_client: waiting for response
    echo_client: received b'This is the message. It will be sent '
    echo_client: received b'in parts.'
    echo_client: closing
    main: closing event loop

Although the client always sends the messages separately, the first
two times the client runs the server receives one large message and
echoes that back to the client. These results vary in subsequent runs,
based on how busy the network is and whether the socket is flushed
before all of the data is prepared.

::

    $ python asyncio_echo_server_coroutine.py
    asyncio: Using selector: KqueueSelector
    main: starting up on localhost port 10000
    echo_::1_64624: connection accepted
    echo_::1_64624: received b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    echo_::1_64624: sent b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    echo_::1_64624: closing
    
    echo_::1_64626: connection accepted
    echo_::1_64626: received b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    echo_::1_64626: sent b'This is the message. It will be sent in parts.'
    echo_::1_64626: closing
    
    echo_::1_64627: connection accepted
    echo_::1_64627: received b'This is the message. It will be sent '
    echo_::1_64627: sent b'This is the message. It will be sent '
    echo_::1_64627: received b'in parts.'
    echo_::1_64627: sent b'in parts.'
    echo_::1_64627: closing
