source/asyncio/tasks.rst, before:

==============================
 Executing Tasks Concurrently
==============================

Tasks are one of the primary ways to interact with the event
loop. Tasks wrap coroutines and track when they are complete. Tasks
are subclasses of :class:`Future`, so other coroutines can wait for
them and each has a result that can be retrieved after the task
completes.

Starting a Task
===============

To start a task, use :func:`create_task` to create a
:class:`Task` instance. The resulting task will run as part of the
concurrent operations managed by the event loop as long as the loop is
running and the coroutine does not return.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_create_task.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

This example uses :func:`run_until_complete` to keep the event loop
running until the task returns a result.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'asyncio_create_task.py', line_break_mode='wrap'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 asyncio_create_task.py
	
	creating task
	task: <Task pending coro=<task_func() running at
	asyncio_create_task.py:12>>
	entering event loop
	in task_func
	task: <Task finished coro=<task_func() done, defined at
	asyncio_create_task.py:12> result='the result'>
	return value: 'the result'
	task result: 'the result'

.. {{{end}}}

Canceling a Task
================

By retaining the :class:`Task` object returned from
:func:`create_task`, it is possible to cancel the operation of the
task before it completes.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_cancel_task.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

This example creates and then cancels a task before starting the event
loop. The result is a :class:`CancelledError` exception from
:func:`run_until_complete`.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'asyncio_cancel_task.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 asyncio_cancel_task.py
	
	creating task
	canceling task
	entering event loop
	caught error from cancelled task

.. {{{end}}}

If a task is canceled while it is waiting for another concurrent
operation, the task is notified of its cancellation by having a
:class:`CancelledError` exception raised at the point where it is
waiting.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_cancel_task2.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Catching the exception provides an opportunity to clean up work
already done, if necessary.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'asyncio_cancel_task2.py', line_break_mode='wrap'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 asyncio_cancel_task2.py
	
	creating task
	in task_func, sleeping
	in task_canceller
	cancelled the task
	task_func was cancelled

.. {{{end}}}

Creating Tasks from Coroutines
==============================

The :func:`ensure_future` function returns a :class:`Task` tied to the
execution of a coroutine. That :class:`Task` instance can then be
passed to other code, which can wait for it without knowing how the
original coroutine was constructed or called.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_ensure_future.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Note that the coroutine given to :func:`ensure_future` is not started
until something uses ``await`` to allow it to be executed.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'asyncio_ensure_future.py', line_break_mode='wrap'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 asyncio_ensure_future.py
	
	entering event loop
	starter: creating task
	starter: waiting for inner
	inner: starting
	inner: waiting for <Task pending coro=<wrapped() running at
	asyncio_ensure_future.py:12>>
	wrapped
	inner: task returned 'result'
	starter: inner returned

.. {{{end}}}

Commit message:

asyncio: clean up task section

source/asyncio/tasks.rst, after:

==============================
 Executing Tasks Concurrently
==============================

Tasks are one of the primary ways to interact with the event
loop. Tasks wrap coroutines and track when they are complete. Tasks
are subclasses of :class:`Future`, so other coroutines can wait for
them and each has a result that can be retrieved after the task
completes.

Starting a Task
===============

To start a task, use :func:`create_task` to create a
:class:`Task` instance. The resulting task will run as part of the
concurrent operations managed by the event loop as long as the loop is
running and the coroutine does not return.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_create_task.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

This example waits for the task to return a result before the
``main()`` function exits.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'asyncio_create_task.py', line_break_mode='wrap'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 asyncio_create_task.py
	
	creating task
	waiting for <Task pending coro=<task_func() running at
	asyncio_create_task.py:12>>
	in task_func
	task completed <Task finished coro=<task_func() done, defined at
	asyncio_create_task.py:12> result='the result'>
	return value: 'the result'

.. {{{end}}}

Canceling a Task
================

By retaining the :class:`Task` object returned from
:func:`create_task`, it is possible to cancel the operation of the
task before it completes.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_cancel_task.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

This example creates and then cancels a task before starting the event
loop. The result is a :class:`CancelledError` exception from
:func:`run_until_complete`.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'asyncio_cancel_task.py', line_break_mode='wrap'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 asyncio_cancel_task.py
	
	creating task
	canceling task
	canceled task <Task cancelling coro=<task_func() running at
	asyncio_cancel_task.py:13>>
	caught error from canceled task

.. {{{end}}}

If a task is canceled while it is waiting for another concurrent
operation, the task is notified of its cancellation by having a
:class:`CancelledError` exception raised at the point where it is
waiting.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_cancel_task2.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Catching the exception provides an opportunity to clean up work
already done, if necessary.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'asyncio_cancel_task2.py', line_break_mode='wrap'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 asyncio_cancel_task2.py
	
	creating task
	in task_func, sleeping
	in task_canceller
	canceled the task
	task_func was canceled
	main() also sees task as canceled

.. {{{end}}}

Creating Tasks from Coroutines
==============================

The :func:`ensure_future` function returns a :class:`Task` tied to the
execution of a coroutine. That :class:`Task` instance can then be
passed to other code, which can wait for it without knowing how the
original coroutine was constructed or called.

.. literalinclude:: asyncio_ensure_future.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Note that the coroutine given to :func:`ensure_future` is not started
until something uses ``await`` to allow it to be executed.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'asyncio_ensure_future.py', line_break_mode='wrap'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 asyncio_ensure_future.py
	
	entering event loop
	starter: creating task
	starter: waiting for inner
	inner: starting
	inner: waiting for <Task pending coro=<wrapped() running at
	asyncio_ensure_future.py:12>>
	wrapped
	inner: task returned 'result'
	starter: inner returned

.. {{{end}}}
