source/string/index.rst, before:

=========================================
 string --- Text Constants and Templates
=========================================

.. module:: string
    :synopsis: Contains constants and classes for working with text.

:Purpose: Contains constants and classes for working with text.

The :mod:`string` module dates from the earliest versions of
Python. Many of the functions previously implemented in the module
have been moved to methods of :class:`str` objects. The :mod:`string`
module retains several useful constants and classes for working with
:class:`str` objects, and this discussion will concentrate on them.

Functions
=========

The function :func:`capwords` capitalizes all of the words in a
string.

.. literalinclude:: string_capwords.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The results are the same as calling :func:`split`, capitalizing the
words in the resulting list, then called :func:`join` to combine the
results.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'string_capwords.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 string_capwords.py
	
	The quick brown fox jumped over the lazy dog.
	The Quick Brown Fox Jumped Over The Lazy Dog.

.. {{{end}}}

Templates
=========

String templates were added as part of :pep:`292` and
are intended as an alternative to the built-in interpolation
syntax. With :class:`string.Template` interpolation, variables are
identified by prefixing the name with ``$`` (e.g., ``$var``) or, if
necessary to set them off from surrounding text, they can also be
wrapped with curly braces (e.g., ``${var}``).

This example compares a simple template with a similar string
interpolation using the ``%`` operator.

.. literalinclude:: string_template.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

In both cases, the trigger character (``$`` or ``%``) is escaped by
repeating it twice.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'string_template.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 string_template.py
	
	TEMPLATE: 
	Variable        : foo
	Escape          : $
	Variable in text: fooiable
	
	INTERPOLATION: 
	Variable        : foo
	Escape          : %
	Variable in text: fooiable
	
	FORMAT: 
	Variable        : foo
	Escape          : {}
	Variable in text: fooiable
	

.. {{{end}}}

One key difference between templates and standard string interpolation
is that the type of the arguments is not taken into account. The
values are converted to strings, and the strings are inserted into the
result. No formatting options are available. For example, there is no
way to control the number of digits used to represent a floating point
value.

A benefit, though, is that by using the :func:`safe_substitute`
method, it is possible to avoid exceptions if not all of the values
needed by the template are provided as arguments.

.. literalinclude:: string_template_missing.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Since there is no value for *missing* in the values dictionary, a
:class:`KeyError` is raised by :func:`substitute`. Instead of
raising the error, :func:`safe_substitute` catches it and leaves the
variable expression alone in the text.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'string_template_missing.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 string_template_missing.py
	
	ERROR: 'missing'
	safe_substitute(): foo is here but $missing is not provided

.. {{{end}}}

Advanced Templates
==================

The default syntax for :class:`string.Template` can be changed by
adjusting the regular expression patterns it uses to find the variable
names in the template body. A simple way to do that is to change the
:attr:`delimiter` and :attr:`idpattern` class attributes.

.. literalinclude:: string_template_advanced.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

In this example, the substitution rules are changed so that the
delimiter is ``%`` instead of ``$`` and variable names must include an
underscore somewhere in the middle.  The pattern ``%notunderscored``
is not replaced by anything, because it does not include an underscore
character.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'string_template_advanced.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 string_template_advanced.py
	
	Modified ID pattern:
	
	  Delimiter : %
	  Replaced  : replaced
	  Ignored   : %notunderscored
	

.. {{{end}}}

For more complex changes, override the :attr:`pattern` attribute and
define an entirely new regular expression. The pattern provided must
contain four named groups for capturing the escaped delimiter, the
named variable, a braced version of the variable name, and invalid
delimiter patterns.

.. literalinclude:: string_template_defaultpattern.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The value of ``t.pattern`` is a compiled regular expression, but the
original string is available via its :attr:`pattern` attribute.

.. this output was edited for clarity and to make it fit on the page

::

	\$(?:
	  (?P<escaped>\$) |                # two delimiters
	  (?P<named>[_a-z][_a-z0-9]*)    | # identifier
	  {(?P<braced>[_a-z][_a-z0-9]*)} | # braced identifier
	  (?P<invalid>)                    # ill-formed delimiter exprs
	)

This example defines a new pattern to create a new type of template,
using ``{{var}}`` as the variable syntax.

.. literalinclude:: string_template_newsyntax.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Both the :attr:`named` and :attr:`braced` patterns must be provided
separately, even though they are the same.  Running the sample program
generates:

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'string_template_newsyntax.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 string_template_newsyntax.py
	
	MATCHES: [('{{', '', '', ''), ('', 'var', '', '')]
	SUBSTITUTED: 
	{{
	replacement
	

.. {{{end}}}

Formatter
=========

The :class:`Formatter` class implements the same layout specification
language as the :func:`format` method of :class:`str`. Features
include type coersion, alignment, attribute and field references,
named and positional template arguments, and type-specific formatting
options. Most of the time the :func:`format` method is a more
convenient interface to these features, but :class:`Formatter` is
provided as a way to build subclasses, for cases where variations are
needed.

.. seealso::

   * :pydoc:`string`

   * `String Methods
     <http://docs.python.org/lib/string-methods.html#string-methods>`_
     -- Methods of :class:`str` objects that replace the deprecated
     functions in :mod:`string`.

   * :pep:`292` -- Simpler String Substitutions

   * `Format String Syntax
     <https://docs.python.org/3.5/library/string.html#format-string-syntax>`__
     -- The formal definition of the layout specification language
     used by :class:`Formatter` and :func:`str.format`.

Commit message:

string: phrasing to include format in example
Change-Id: Id6542f66073bed4ef286fa60f8e2297984b61870
Signed-off-by: Doug Hellmann <doug@doughellmann.com>

source/string/index.rst, after:

=========================================
 string --- Text Constants and Templates
=========================================

.. module:: string
    :synopsis: Contains constants and classes for working with text.

:Purpose: Contains constants and classes for working with text.

The :mod:`string` module dates from the earliest versions of
Python. Many of the functions previously implemented in the module
have been moved to methods of :class:`str` objects. The :mod:`string`
module retains several useful constants and classes for working with
:class:`str` objects, and this discussion will concentrate on them.

Functions
=========

The function :func:`capwords` capitalizes all of the words in a
string.

.. literalinclude:: string_capwords.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The results are the same as calling :func:`split`, capitalizing the
words in the resulting list, then called :func:`join` to combine the
results.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'string_capwords.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 string_capwords.py
	
	The quick brown fox jumped over the lazy dog.
	The Quick Brown Fox Jumped Over The Lazy Dog.

.. {{{end}}}

Templates
=========

String templates were added as part of :pep:`292` and
are intended as an alternative to the built-in interpolation
syntax. With :class:`string.Template` interpolation, variables are
identified by prefixing the name with ``$`` (e.g., ``$var``) or, if
necessary to set them off from surrounding text, they can also be
wrapped with curly braces (e.g., ``${var}``).

This example compares a simple template with similar string
interpolation using the ``%`` operator and the new format string
syntax using :func:`str.format`.

.. literalinclude:: string_template.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

In the first two cases, the trigger character (``$`` or ``%``) is
escaped by repeating it twice. For the format syntax, both ``{`` and
``}`` need to be escaped by repeating them.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'string_template.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 string_template.py
	
	TEMPLATE: 
	Variable        : foo
	Escape          : $
	Variable in text: fooiable
	
	INTERPOLATION: 
	Variable        : foo
	Escape          : %
	Variable in text: fooiable
	
	FORMAT: 
	Variable        : foo
	Escape          : {}
	Variable in text: fooiable
	

.. {{{end}}}

One key difference between templates and string interpolation or
formatting is that the type of the arguments is not taken into
account. The values are converted to strings, and the strings are
inserted into the result. No formatting options are available. For
example, there is no way to control the number of digits used to
represent a floating point value.

A benefit, though, is that by using the :func:`safe_substitute`
method, it is possible to avoid exceptions if not all of the values
needed by the template are provided as arguments.

.. literalinclude:: string_template_missing.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Since there is no value for *missing* in the values dictionary, a
:class:`KeyError` is raised by :func:`substitute`. Instead of
raising the error, :func:`safe_substitute` catches it and leaves the
variable expression alone in the text.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'string_template_missing.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 string_template_missing.py
	
	ERROR: 'missing'
	safe_substitute(): foo is here but $missing is not provided

.. {{{end}}}

Advanced Templates
==================

The default syntax for :class:`string.Template` can be changed by
adjusting the regular expression patterns it uses to find the variable
names in the template body. A simple way to do that is to change the
:attr:`delimiter` and :attr:`idpattern` class attributes.

.. literalinclude:: string_template_advanced.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

In this example, the substitution rules are changed so that the
delimiter is ``%`` instead of ``$`` and variable names must include an
underscore somewhere in the middle.  The pattern ``%notunderscored``
is not replaced by anything, because it does not include an underscore
character.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'string_template_advanced.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 string_template_advanced.py
	
	Modified ID pattern:
	
	  Delimiter : %
	  Replaced  : replaced
	  Ignored   : %notunderscored
	

.. {{{end}}}

For more complex changes, override the :attr:`pattern` attribute and
define an entirely new regular expression. The pattern provided must
contain four named groups for capturing the escaped delimiter, the
named variable, a braced version of the variable name, and invalid
delimiter patterns.

.. literalinclude:: string_template_defaultpattern.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The value of ``t.pattern`` is a compiled regular expression, but the
original string is available via its :attr:`pattern` attribute.

.. this output was edited for clarity and to make it fit on the page

::

	\$(?:
	  (?P<escaped>\$) |                # two delimiters
	  (?P<named>[_a-z][_a-z0-9]*)    | # identifier
	  {(?P<braced>[_a-z][_a-z0-9]*)} | # braced identifier
	  (?P<invalid>)                    # ill-formed delimiter exprs
	)

This example defines a new pattern to create a new type of template,
using ``{{var}}`` as the variable syntax.

.. literalinclude:: string_template_newsyntax.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Both the :attr:`named` and :attr:`braced` patterns must be provided
separately, even though they are the same.  Running the sample program
generates:

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'string_template_newsyntax.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 string_template_newsyntax.py
	
	MATCHES: [('{{', '', '', ''), ('', 'var', '', '')]
	SUBSTITUTED: 
	{{
	replacement
	

.. {{{end}}}

Formatter
=========

The :class:`Formatter` class implements the same layout specification
language as the :func:`format` method of :class:`str`. Features
include type coersion, alignment, attribute and field references,
named and positional template arguments, and type-specific formatting
options. Most of the time the :func:`format` method is a more
convenient interface to these features, but :class:`Formatter` is
provided as a way to build subclasses, for cases where variations are
needed.

.. seealso::

   * :pydoc:`string`

   * `String Methods
     <http://docs.python.org/lib/string-methods.html#string-methods>`_
     -- Methods of :class:`str` objects that replace the deprecated
     functions in :mod:`string`.

   * :pep:`292` -- Simpler String Substitutions

   * `Format String Syntax
     <https://docs.python.org/3.5/library/string.html#format-string-syntax>`__
     -- The formal definition of the layout specification language
     used by :class:`Formatter` and :func:`str.format`.
