source/hmac/index.rst, before:

======================================================
hmac -- Cryptographic Message Signing and Verification
======================================================

.. module:: hmac
    :synopsis: Cryptographic signature and verification of messages.

:Purpose: 
    The hmac module implements keyed-hashing for message authentication, as
    described in RFC 2104.

The HMAC algorithm can be used to verify the integrity of information
passed between applications or stored in a potentially vulnerable
location. The basic idea is to generate a cryptographic hash of the
actual data combined with a shared secret key. The resulting hash can
then be used to check the transmitted or stored message to determine a
level of trust, without transmitting the secret key.

.. warning::

  Disclaimer: I am not a security expert. For the full details on
  HMAC, check out :rfc:`2104`.

Signing Messages
================

The :func:`new` function creates a new object for calculating a
message signature.  This example uses the default MD5 hash algorithm.

.. literalinclude:: hmac_simple.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

When run, the code reads a data file and computes an HMAC
signature for it.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'hmac_simple.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 hmac_simple.py
	
	4bcb287e284f8c21e87e14ba2dc40b16

.. {{{end}}}

SHA vs. MD5
===========

Although the default cryptographic algorithm for :mod:`hmac` is MD5,
that is not the most secure method to use. MD5 hashes have some
weaknesses, such as collisions (where two different messages produce
the same hash). The SHA-1 algorithm is considered to be stronger, and
should be used instead.

.. literalinclude:: hmac_sha.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The :func:`new` function takes three arguments. The first is the
secret key, which should be shared between the two endpoints that are
communicating so both ends can use the same value. The second value is
an initial message. If the message content that needs to be
authenticated is small, such as a timestamp or HTTP POST, the entire
body of the message can be passed to :func:`new` instead of using the
:func:`update` method. The last argument is the digest module to be
used. The default is :const:`hashlib.md5`. This example
substitutes :const:`hashlib.sha1`.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'hmac_sha.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 hmac_sha.py
	
	b788fe34586df5078ef94ea503ab1fc99e086314

.. {{{end}}}

Binary Digests
==============

The previous examples used the :func:`hexdigest` method to produce
printable digests. the hexdigest is a different representation of
the value calculated by the :func:`digest` method, which is a binary
value that may include unprintable or non-ASCII characters, including
:const:`NUL`.  Some web services (Google checkout, Amazon S3) use the
base64 encoded version of the binary digest instead of the hexdigest.

.. literalinclude:: hmac_base64.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

the base64 encoded string ends in a newline, which frequently needs to
be stripped off when embedding the string in http headers or other
formatting-sensitive contexts.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'hmac_base64.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 hmac_base64.py
	
	b'olW2DoXHGJEKGU0aE9fOwSVE/o4=\n'

.. {{{end}}}

.. _hmac-pickle:

Applications of Message Signatures
==================================

HMAC authentication should be used for any public network service, and
any time data is stored where security is important. For example, when
sending data through a pipe or socket, that data should be signed and
then the signature should be tested before the data is used. The
extended example given here is available in the file
``hmac_pickle.py``.

The first step is to establish a function to calculate a digest for a
string, and a simple class to be instantiated and passed through a
communication channel.

.. literalinclude:: hmac_pickle.py
   :lines: 6-31

Next, create a :mod:`StringIO` buffer to represent the socket or
pipe. The example uses a naive, but easy to parse, format for the data
stream. The digest and length of the data are written, followed by a
new line. The serialized representation of the object, generated by
:mod:`pickle`, follows. a real system would not want to depend on a
length value, since if the digest is wrong the length is probably
wrong as well. Some sort of terminator sequence not likely to appear
in the real data would be more appropriate.

The example program then writes two objects to the stream. the first
is written using the correct digest value.

.. literalinclude:: hmac_pickle.py
   :lines: 34-45


The second object is written to the stream with an invalid digest,
produced by calculating the digest for some other data instead of the
pickle.

.. literalinclude:: hmac_pickle.py
   :lines: 47-56

Now that the data is in the :mod:`StringIO` buffer, it can be read
back out again.  Start by reading the line of data with the digest and
data length.  Then read the remaining data, using the length
value. :func:`pickle.load` could read directly from the stream, but
that assumes a trusted data stream and this data is not yet trusted
enough to unpickle it. Reading the pickle as a string from the stream,
without actually unpickling the object, is safer.

.. literalinclude:: hmac_pickle.py
   :lines: 59-71


Once the pickled data is in memory, the digest value can be
recalculated and compared against the data read. If the digests match,
it is safe to trust the data and unpickle it.

.. literalinclude:: hmac_pickle.py
   :lines: 73-

The output shows that the first object is verified and the second is deemed
"corrupted", as expected:

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'hmac_pickle.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 hmac_pickle.py
	
	WRITING: b'f49cd2bf7922911129e8df37f76f95485a0b52ca 69\n'
	
	WRITING: b'b01b209e28d7e053408ebe23b90fe5c33bc6a0ec 76\n'
	
	READ: f49cd2bf7922911129e8df37f76f95485a0b52ca 69
	ACTUAL: b'f49cd2bf7922911129e8df37f76f95485a0b52ca'
	WARNING: Data corruption
	
	READ: b01b209e28d7e053408ebe23b90fe5c33bc6a0ec 76
	ACTUAL: b'2ab061f9a9f749b8dd6f175bf57292e02e95c119'
	WARNING: Data corruption

.. {{{end}}}


.. seealso::

    `hmac <http://docs.python.org/library/hmac.html>`_
        The standard library documentation for this module.
    
    :rfc:`2104`
        HMAC: Keyed-Hashing for Message Authentication

    :mod:`hashlib`
        The ``hashlib`` module provides MD5 and SHA1 hash generators.

    :mod:`pickle`
        Serialization library.

    `WikiPedia: MD5 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MD5>`_
        Description of the MD5 hashing algorithm.

    `Authenticating to Amazon S3 Web Service <http://docs.amazonwebservices.com/AmazonS3/2006-03-01/index.html?S3_Authentication.html>`_
        Instructions for authenticating to S3 using HMAC-SHA1 signed credentials.

Commit message:

hmac: use name instead of explicit function reference for sha1

source/hmac/index.rst, after:

======================================================
hmac -- Cryptographic Message Signing and Verification
======================================================

.. module:: hmac
    :synopsis: Cryptographic signature and verification of messages.

:Purpose: 
    The hmac module implements keyed-hashing for message authentication, as
    described in RFC 2104.

The HMAC algorithm can be used to verify the integrity of information
passed between applications or stored in a potentially vulnerable
location. The basic idea is to generate a cryptographic hash of the
actual data combined with a shared secret key. The resulting hash can
then be used to check the transmitted or stored message to determine a
level of trust, without transmitting the secret key.

.. warning::

  Disclaimer: I am not a security expert. For the full details on
  HMAC, check out :rfc:`2104`.

Signing Messages
================

The :func:`new` function creates a new object for calculating a
message signature.  This example uses the default MD5 hash algorithm.

.. literalinclude:: hmac_simple.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

When run, the code reads a data file and computes an HMAC
signature for it.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'hmac_simple.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 hmac_simple.py
	
	4bcb287e284f8c21e87e14ba2dc40b16

.. {{{end}}}

Alternate Digest Types
======================

Although the default cryptographic algorithm for :mod:`hmac` is MD5,
that is not the most secure method to use. MD5 hashes have some
weaknesses, such as collisions (where two different messages produce
the same hash). The SHA-1 algorithm is considered to be stronger, and
should be used instead.

.. literalinclude:: hmac_sha.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The :func:`new` function takes three arguments. The first is the
secret key, which should be shared between the two endpoints that are
communicating so both ends can use the same value. The second value is
an initial message. If the message content that needs to be
authenticated is small, such as a timestamp or HTTP POST, the entire
body of the message can be passed to :func:`new` instead of using the
:func:`update` method. The last argument is the digest module to be
used. The default is :const:`hashlib.md5`. This example passes
``'sha1'``, causing :mod:`hmac` to use :const:`hashlib.sha1`

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'hmac_sha.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 hmac_sha.py
	
	3c3992fa7aefb81b73a52f49713cf3faa272382a

.. {{{end}}}

Binary Digests
==============

The previous examples used the :func:`hexdigest` method to produce
printable digests. the hexdigest is a different representation of
the value calculated by the :func:`digest` method, which is a binary
value that may include unprintable or non-ASCII characters, including
:const:`NUL`.  Some web services (Google checkout, Amazon S3) use the
base64 encoded version of the binary digest instead of the hexdigest.

.. literalinclude:: hmac_base64.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

the base64 encoded string ends in a newline, which frequently needs to
be stripped off when embedding the string in http headers or other
formatting-sensitive contexts.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'hmac_base64.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 hmac_base64.py
	
	b'olW2DoXHGJEKGU0aE9fOwSVE/o4=\n'

.. {{{end}}}

.. _hmac-pickle:

Applications of Message Signatures
==================================

HMAC authentication should be used for any public network service, and
any time data is stored where security is important. For example, when
sending data through a pipe or socket, that data should be signed and
then the signature should be tested before the data is used. The
extended example given here is available in the file
``hmac_pickle.py``.

The first step is to establish a function to calculate a digest for a
string, and a simple class to be instantiated and passed through a
communication channel.

.. literalinclude:: hmac_pickle.py
   :lines: 6-31

Next, create a :mod:`StringIO` buffer to represent the socket or
pipe. The example uses a naive, but easy to parse, format for the data
stream. The digest and length of the data are written, followed by a
new line. The serialized representation of the object, generated by
:mod:`pickle`, follows. a real system would not want to depend on a
length value, since if the digest is wrong the length is probably
wrong as well. Some sort of terminator sequence not likely to appear
in the real data would be more appropriate.

The example program then writes two objects to the stream. the first
is written using the correct digest value.

.. literalinclude:: hmac_pickle.py
   :lines: 34-45


The second object is written to the stream with an invalid digest,
produced by calculating the digest for some other data instead of the
pickle.

.. literalinclude:: hmac_pickle.py
   :lines: 47-56

Now that the data is in the :mod:`StringIO` buffer, it can be read
back out again.  Start by reading the line of data with the digest and
data length.  Then read the remaining data, using the length
value. :func:`pickle.load` could read directly from the stream, but
that assumes a trusted data stream and this data is not yet trusted
enough to unpickle it. Reading the pickle as a string from the stream,
without actually unpickling the object, is safer.

.. literalinclude:: hmac_pickle.py
   :lines: 59-71


Once the pickled data is in memory, the digest value can be
recalculated and compared against the data read. If the digests match,
it is safe to trust the data and unpickle it.

.. literalinclude:: hmac_pickle.py
   :lines: 73-

The output shows that the first object is verified and the second is deemed
"corrupted", as expected:

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'hmac_pickle.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 hmac_pickle.py
	
	WRITING: b'f49cd2bf7922911129e8df37f76f95485a0b52ca 69\n'
	
	WRITING: b'b01b209e28d7e053408ebe23b90fe5c33bc6a0ec 76\n'
	
	READ: f49cd2bf7922911129e8df37f76f95485a0b52ca 69
	ACTUAL: b'f49cd2bf7922911129e8df37f76f95485a0b52ca'
	WARNING: Data corruption
	
	READ: b01b209e28d7e053408ebe23b90fe5c33bc6a0ec 76
	ACTUAL: b'2ab061f9a9f749b8dd6f175bf57292e02e95c119'
	WARNING: Data corruption

.. {{{end}}}


.. seealso::

    `hmac <http://docs.python.org/library/hmac.html>`_
        The standard library documentation for this module.
    
    :rfc:`2104`
        HMAC: Keyed-Hashing for Message Authentication

    :mod:`hashlib`
        The ``hashlib`` module provides MD5 and SHA1 hash generators.

    :mod:`pickle`
        Serialization library.

    `WikiPedia: MD5 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MD5>`_
        Description of the MD5 hashing algorithm.

    `Authenticating to Amazon S3 Web Service <http://docs.amazonwebservices.com/AmazonS3/2006-03-01/index.html?S3_Authentication.html>`_
        Instructions for authenticating to S3 using HMAC-SHA1 signed credentials.
