source/base64/index.rst, before:

=========================================
 base64 -- Encode Binary Data with ASCII
=========================================

.. module:: base64
    :synopsis: Encode binary data with ASCII characters.

:Purpose: The base64 module contains functions for translating binary data into a subset of ASCII suitable for transmission using plaintext protocols.

The base64, base32, and base16 encodings convert 8 bit bytes to values
with 6, 5, or 4 bits of useful data per byte, allowing non-ASCII bytes
to be encoded as ASCII characters for transmission over protocols that
require plain ASCII, such as SMTP.  The *base* values correspond to
the length of the alphabet used in each encoding.  There are also
URL-safe variations of the original encodings that use slightly
different alphabets.

Base 64 Encoding
================

A basic example of encoding some text looks like this:

.. include:: base64_b64encode.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The output shows the 168 bytes of the original source expand to 224
bytes after being encoded.

.. note::

    There are no carriage returns in the encoded data produced by the
    library, but the output has been wrapped artificially to make it
    fit better on the page.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'base64_b64encode.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 base64_b64encode.py
	
	185 bytes before encoding
	Expect 1 padding bytes
	248 bytes after encoding
	
	b'CgppbXBvcnQgYmFzZTY0CmltcG9ydCB0ZXh0d3JhcAoKIyBMb2FkIHRoaXMgc2
	91cmNlIGZpbGUgYW5kIHN0cmlwIHRoZSBoZWFkZXIuCndpdGggb3BlbihfX2ZpbG
	VfXywgJ3InLCBlbmNvZGluZz0ndXRmLTgnKSBhcyBpbnB1dDoKICAgIHJhdyA9IG
	lucHV0LnJlYWQoKQogICAgaW5pdGlhbF9kYXRhID0gcmF3LnNwbGl0KCc='

.. {{{end}}}


Base 64 Decoding
================

:func:`b64decode` converts the encoded string back to the original
form by taking four bytes and converting them to the original three, using a
lookup table.

.. include:: base64_b64decode.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The encoding process looks at each sequence of 24 bits in the input
(three bytes) and encodes those same 24 bits spread over four bytes in
the output.  The equal signs at the end of the output are padding
inserted because the number of bits in the original string was not
evenly divisible by 24 in this example.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'base64_b64decode.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 base64_b64decode.py
	
	Original: b'This is the data, in the clear.'
	Encoded : b'VGhpcyBpcyB0aGUgZGF0YSwgaW4gdGhlIGNsZWFyLg=='
	Decoded : b'This is the data, in the clear.'

.. {{{end}}}

URL-safe Variations
===================

Because the default base64 alphabet may use ``+`` and ``/``, and those
two characters are used in URLs, it is often necessary to use an
alternate encoding with substitutes for those characters.  

.. include:: base64_urlsafe.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The ``+`` is replaced with a ``-``, and ``/`` is replaced with
underscore (``_``).  Otherwise, the alphabet is the same.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'base64_urlsafe.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 base64_urlsafe.py
	
	Original         : b'\xfb\xef'
	Standard encoding: b'++8='
	URL-safe encoding: b'--8='
	
	Original         : b'\xff\xff'
	Standard encoding: b'//8='
	URL-safe encoding: b'__8='
	

.. {{{end}}}


Other Encodings
===============

Besides base 64, the module provides functions for working with base
32 and base 16 (hex) encoded data.

.. include:: base64_base32.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Base 32 output:

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'base64_base32.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 base64_base32.py
	
	Original: b'This is the data, in the clear.'
	Encoded : b'KRUGS4ZANFZSA5DIMUQGIYLUMEWCA2LOEB2GQZJAMNWGKYLSFY==
	===='
	Decoded : b'This is the data, in the clear.'

.. {{{end}}}

The base 16 functions work with the hexadecimal alphabet.

.. include:: base64_base16.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Each time the number of encoding bits goes down, the output in the
encoded format takes up more space.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'base64_base16.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 base64_base16.py
	
	Original: b'This is the data, in the clear.'
	Encoded : b'546869732069732074686520646174612C20696E207468652063
	6C6561722E'
	Decoded : b'This is the data, in the clear.'

.. {{{end}}}

.. seealso::

    * `base64 <http://docs.python.org/3/library/base64.html>`_ -- The
      standard library documentation for this module.

    * :rfc:`3548` -- The Base16, Base32, and Base64 Data Encodings

Commit message:

base64: tighten up a few examples and add porting notes

source/base64/index.rst, after:

=========================================
 base64 -- Encode Binary Data with ASCII
=========================================

.. module:: base64
    :synopsis: Encode binary data with ASCII characters.

:Purpose: The base64 module contains functions for translating binary
          data into a subset of ASCII suitable for transmission using
          plaintext protocols.

The base64, base32, and base16 encodings convert 8 bit bytes to values
with 6, 5, or 4 bits of useful data per byte, allowing non-ASCII bytes
to be encoded as ASCII characters for transmission over protocols that
require plain ASCII, such as SMTP.  The *base* values correspond to
the length of the alphabet used in each encoding.  There are also
URL-safe variations of the original encodings that use slightly
different alphabets.

Base 64 Encoding
================

A basic example of encoding some text looks like this:

.. include:: base64_b64encode.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The input must be a byte string, so the unicode string is first
encoded to UTF-8. The output shows the 185 bytes of the UTF-8 source
expand to 248 bytes after being encoded.

.. note::

    There are no carriage returns in the encoded data produced by the
    library, but the output has been wrapped artificially to make it
    fit better on the page.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'base64_b64encode.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 base64_b64encode.py
	
	185 bytes before encoding
	Expect 1 padding bytes
	248 bytes after encoding
	
	b'CgppbXBvcnQgYmFzZTY0CmltcG9ydCB0ZXh0d3JhcAoKIyBMb2FkIHRoaXMgc2
	91cmNlIGZpbGUgYW5kIHN0cmlwIHRoZSBoZWFkZXIuCndpdGggb3BlbihfX2ZpbG
	VfXywgJ3InLCBlbmNvZGluZz0ndXRmLTgnKSBhcyBpbnB1dDoKICAgIHJhdyA9IG
	lucHV0LnJlYWQoKQogICAgaW5pdGlhbF9kYXRhID0gcmF3LnNwbGl0KCc='

.. {{{end}}}


Base 64 Decoding
================

:func:`b64decode` converts an encoded string back to the original
form by taking four bytes and converting them to the original three, using a
lookup table.

.. include:: base64_b64decode.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The encoding process looks at each sequence of 24 bits in the input
(three bytes) and encodes those same 24 bits spread over four bytes in
the output.  The equal signs at the end of the output are padding
inserted because the number of bits in the original string was not
evenly divisible by 24 in this example.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'base64_b64decode.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 base64_b64decode.py
	
	Encoded : b'VGhpcyBpcyB0aGUgZGF0YSwgaW4gdGhlIGNsZWFyLg=='
	Decoded : b'This is the data, in the clear.'

.. {{{end}}}

The value returned from :func:`b64decode` is a byte string. If the
contents are known to be text, the byte string can be converted to a
unicode object. However, the point of using base 64 encoding is to be
able to transmit binary data, and so it is not always safe to assume
that the decoded value is text.

URL-safe Variations
===================

Because the default base64 alphabet may use ``+`` and ``/``, both of
which are used in URLs, it is often necessary to use an alternate
encoding with substitutes for those characters.

.. include:: base64_urlsafe.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The ``+`` is replaced with a ``-``, and ``/`` is replaced with
underscore (``_``).  Otherwise, the alphabet is the same.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'base64_urlsafe.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 base64_urlsafe.py
	
	Original         : b'\xfb\xef'
	Standard encoding: b'++8='
	URL-safe encoding: b'--8='
	
	Original         : b'\xff\xff'
	Standard encoding: b'//8='
	URL-safe encoding: b'__8='
	

.. {{{end}}}


Other Encodings
===============

Besides base 64, the module provides functions for working with base
32 and base 16 (hex) encoded data.

.. include:: base64_base32.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Base 32 output:

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'base64_base32.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 base64_base32.py
	
	Original: b'This is the data, in the clear.'
	Encoded : b'KRUGS4ZANFZSA5DIMUQGIYLUMEWCA2LOEB2GQZJAMNWGKYLSFY==
	===='
	Decoded : b'This is the data, in the clear.'

.. {{{end}}}

The base 16 functions work with the hexadecimal alphabet.

.. include:: base64_base16.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Each time the number of encoding bits goes down, the output in the
encoded format takes up more space.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'base64_base16.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 base64_base16.py
	
	Original: b'This is the data, in the clear.'
	Encoded : b'546869732069732074686520646174612C20696E207468652063
	6C6561722E'
	Decoded : b'This is the data, in the clear.'

.. {{{end}}}

.. seealso::

    * `base64 <http://docs.python.org/3/library/base64.html>`_ -- The
      standard library documentation for this module.

    * :rfc:`3548` -- The Base16, Base32, and Base64 Data Encodings

    * :ref:`Porting notes for base64 <porting-base64>`
