source/sys/interpreter.rst, before:

.. _sys-interpreter:

====================
Interpreter Settings
====================

:mod:`sys` contains attributes and functions for accessing
compile-time or runtime configuration settings for the interpreter.

.. _sys-build-time-info:

Build-time Version Information
==============================

The version used to build the C interpreter is available in a few
forms.  :const:`sys.version` is a human-readable string that usually
includes the full version number as well as information about the
build date, compiler, and platform.  :const:`sys.hexversion` is easier
to use for checking the interpreter version since it is a simple
integer.  When formatted using :func:`hex`, it is clear that parts of
:const:`sys.hexversion` come from the version information also visible
in the more readable :const:`sys.version_info` (a five-part tuple
representing just the version number).  

More specific information about the source that went into the build
can be found in the :const:`sys.subversion` tuple, which includes the
actual branch and subversion revision that was checked out and built.
The separate C API version used by the current interpreter is saved in
:const:`sys.api_version`.

.. include:: sys_version_values.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

All of the values depend on the actual interpreter used to run the
sample program.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(script_output(cog.inFile, 'sys_version_values.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 sys_version_values.py
	
	Version info:
	
	sys.version      = '3.4.2 (v3.4.2:ab2c023a9432, Oct  5 2014, 20:4
	2:22) \n[GCC 4.2.1 (Apple Inc. build 5666) (dot 3)]'
	sys.version_info = sys.version_info(major=3, minor=4, micro=2, re
	leaselevel='final', serial=0)
	sys.hexversion   = 0x30402f0
	sys.api_version  = 1013

.. {{{end}}}

The operating system platform used to build the interpreter is saved
as :const:`sys.platform`.

.. include:: sys_platform.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

For most Unix systems, the value comes from combining the output of
``uname -s`` with the first part of the version in ``uname -r``. For
other operating systems there is a hard-coded table of values.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(script_output(cog.inFile, 'sys_platform.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 sys_platform.py
	
	This interpreter was built for: darwin

.. {{{end}}}

  `Platform values <http://docs.python.org/library/sys.html#sys.platform>`_
    Hard-coded values of :const:`sys.platform` for systems without :command:`uname`.

Interpreter Implementation
==========================

The CPython interpreter is one of several implementations of the
Python language.  :data:`sys.implementation` is provided to detect the
current implementation for libraries that need to work around any
differences in interpreters.

.. include:: sys_implementation.py
   :literal:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

:data:`sys.implementation.version` is the same as
:data:`sys.version_info` for CPython, but will be different for
other interpreters.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(script_output(cog.inFile, 'sys_implementation.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 sys_implementation.py
	
	Name: cpython
	Version: sys.version_info(major=3, minor=4, micro=2, releaselevel
	='final', serial=0)
	Cache tag: cpython-34

.. {{{end}}}

.. seealso::

   * :pep:`421` - Adding :data:`sys.implementation`

Command Line Options
====================

The CPython interpreter accepts several command line options to
control its behavior, listed in :table:`CPython Command Line Option
Flags`.

.. table:: CPython Command Line Option Flags

    ========    =======
    Option      Meaning
    ========    =======
    ``-B``      do not write .py[co] files on import
    ``-d``      debug output from parser
    ``-E``      ignore PYTHON* environment variables (such as PYTHONPATH)
    ``-i``      inspect interactively after running script
    ``-O``      optimize generated bytecode slightly
    ``-OO``     remove doc-strings in addition to the -O optimizations
    ``-s``      do not add user site directory to sys.path
    ``-S``      do not run 'import site' on initialization
    ``-t``      issue warnings about inconsistent tab usage
    ``-tt``     issue errors for inconsistent tab usage
    ``-v``      verbose
    ========    =======

Some of these are available for programs to check through
:const:`sys.flags`.

.. include:: sys_flags.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Experiment with ``sys_flags.py`` to learn how the command line options
map to the flags settings.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(script_output(cog.inFile, '-S -E sys_flags.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 -S -E sys_flags.py
	
	Not importing "site"
	Ignoring environment

.. {{{end}}}


.. _sys-unicode-defaults:

Unicode Defaults
================

To get the name of the default Unicode encoding being used by the
interpreter, use :func:`getdefaultencoding`.  The value is set during
start-up by :mod:`site`, which calls :func:`sys.setdefaultencoding` and
then removes it from the namespace in :mod:`sys` to avoid having it
called again.

The internal encoding default and the file system encoding may be
different for some operating systems, so there is a separate way to
retrieve the file system setting.  :func:`getfile systemencoding`
returns an OS-specific (*not* file system-specific) value.

.. include:: sys_unicode.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Rather than changing the global default encoding, most Unicode experts
recommend making an application explicitly Unicode-aware. This
provides two benefits: Different Unicode encodings for different data
sources can be handled more cleanly, and the number of assumptions
about encodings in the application code is reduced.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(script_output(cog.inFile, 'sys_unicode.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 sys_unicode.py
	
	Default encoding     : utf-8
	File system encoding : utf-8

.. {{{end}}}


Interactive Prompts
===================

The interactive interpreter uses two separate prompts for indicating
the default input level (:data:`ps1`) and the "continuation" of a
multi-line statement (:data:`ps2`).  The values are only used by the
interactive interpreter.

::

    >>> import sys
    >>> sys.ps1
    '>>> '
    >>> sys.ps2
    '... '
    >>>

Either or both prompt can be changed to a different string

::

    >>> sys.ps1 = '::: '
    ::: sys.ps2 = '~~~ '
    ::: for i in range(3):
    ~~~   print i
    ~~~ 
    0
    1
    2
    ::: 

Alternately, any object that can be converted to a string (via
``__str__``) can be used for the prompt.

.. include:: sys_ps1.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The :class:`LineCounter` keeps track of how many times it has been
used, so the number in the prompt increases each time.

::

    $ python
    Python 3.4.2 (v3.4.2:ab2c023a9432, Oct  5 2014, 20:42:22)
    [GCC 4.2.1 (Apple Inc. build 5666) (dot 3)] on darwin
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more
    information.
    >>> from source.sys.sys_ps1 import LineCounter
    >>> import sys
    >>> sys.ps1 = LineCounter()
    (  1)>
    (  2)>
    (  3)>

Display Hook
============

:data:`sys.displayhook` is invoked by the interactive interpreter each
time the user enters an expression.  The *result* of the expression is
passed as the only argument to the function.  

.. include:: sys_displayhook.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The default value (saved in :data:`sys.__displayhook__`) prints the
result to stdout and saves it in :data:`_` for easy
reference later.

::

    $ python3
    Python 3.4.2 (v3.4.2:ab2c023a9432, Oct  5 2014, 20:42:22)
    [GCC 4.2.1 (Apple Inc. build 5666) (dot 3)] on darwin
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more
    information.
    >>> import source.sys.sys_displayhook
    installing
    >>> 1 + 2
    
      Previous: <source.sys.sys_displayhook.ExpressionCounter
      object at 0x1021035f8>
      New     : 3
    
    3
    (  1)> 'abc'
    
      Previous: 3
      New     : abc
    
    'abc'
    (  2)> 'abc'
    
      Previous: abc
      New     : abc
    
    'abc'
    (  2)> 'abc' * 3
    
      Previous: abc
      New     : abcabcabc
    
    'abcabcabc'
    (  3)>


Install Location
================

The path to the actual interpreter program is available in
:const:`sys.executable` on all systems for which having a path to the
interpreter makes sense.  This can be useful for ensuring that the
correct interpreter is being used, and also gives clues about paths
that might be set based on the interpreter location.

:const:`sys.prefix` refers to the parent directory of the interpreter
installation.  It usually includes ``bin`` and ``lib`` directories for
executables and installed modules, respectively.

.. include:: sys_locations.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

This example output was produced on a Mac running a framework build
installed from python.org.

::

	$ python3 sys_locations.py
	
    Interpreter executable: /Library/Frameworks/Python.framework/
    Versions/3.4/bin/python3.4
    Installation prefix   : /Library/Frameworks/Python.framework/
    Versions/3.4

Commit message:

sys: add sys.flags.bytes_warning
Change-Id: Ic9ab9909c0c5c33d42720a2c582a3920b0bdb1a8

source/sys/interpreter.rst, after:

.. _sys-interpreter:

====================
Interpreter Settings
====================

:mod:`sys` contains attributes and functions for accessing
compile-time or runtime configuration settings for the interpreter.

.. _sys-build-time-info:

Build-time Version Information
==============================

The version used to build the C interpreter is available in a few
forms.  :const:`sys.version` is a human-readable string that usually
includes the full version number as well as information about the
build date, compiler, and platform.  :const:`sys.hexversion` is easier
to use for checking the interpreter version since it is a simple
integer.  When formatted using :func:`hex`, it is clear that parts of
:const:`sys.hexversion` come from the version information also visible
in the more readable :const:`sys.version_info` (a five-part tuple
representing just the version number).  

More specific information about the source that went into the build
can be found in the :const:`sys.subversion` tuple, which includes the
actual branch and subversion revision that was checked out and built.
The separate C API version used by the current interpreter is saved in
:const:`sys.api_version`.

.. include:: sys_version_values.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

All of the values depend on the actual interpreter used to run the
sample program.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(script_output(cog.inFile, 'sys_version_values.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 sys_version_values.py
	
	Version info:
	
	sys.version      = '3.4.2 (v3.4.2:ab2c023a9432, Oct  5 2014, 20:4
	2:22) \n[GCC 4.2.1 (Apple Inc. build 5666) (dot 3)]'
	sys.version_info = sys.version_info(major=3, minor=4, micro=2, re
	leaselevel='final', serial=0)
	sys.hexversion   = 0x30402f0
	sys.api_version  = 1013

.. {{{end}}}

The operating system platform used to build the interpreter is saved
as :const:`sys.platform`.

.. include:: sys_platform.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

For most Unix systems, the value comes from combining the output of
``uname -s`` with the first part of the version in ``uname -r``. For
other operating systems there is a hard-coded table of values.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(script_output(cog.inFile, 'sys_platform.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 sys_platform.py
	
	This interpreter was built for: darwin

.. {{{end}}}

  `Platform values <http://docs.python.org/library/sys.html#sys.platform>`_
    Hard-coded values of :const:`sys.platform` for systems without :command:`uname`.

Interpreter Implementation
==========================

The CPython interpreter is one of several implementations of the
Python language.  :data:`sys.implementation` is provided to detect the
current implementation for libraries that need to work around any
differences in interpreters.

.. include:: sys_implementation.py
   :literal:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

:data:`sys.implementation.version` is the same as
:data:`sys.version_info` for CPython, but will be different for
other interpreters.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(script_output(cog.inFile, 'sys_implementation.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 sys_implementation.py
	
	Name: cpython
	Version: sys.version_info(major=3, minor=4, micro=2, releaselevel
	='final', serial=0)
	Cache tag: cpython-34

.. {{{end}}}

.. seealso::

   * :pep:`421` - Adding :data:`sys.implementation`

Command Line Options
====================

The CPython interpreter accepts several command line options to
control its behavior, listed in :table:`CPython Command Line Option
Flags`.

.. table:: CPython Command Line Option Flags

    ========    =======
    Option      Meaning
    ========    =======
    ``-B``      do not write .py[co] files on import
    ``-b``      issue warnings about converting bytes to string without decoding properly and comparing bytes with strings
    ``-bb``     convert bytes warnings to errors
    ``-d``      debug output from parser
    ``-E``      ignore PYTHON* environment variables (such as PYTHONPATH)
    ``-i``      inspect interactively after running script
    ``-O``      optimize generated bytecode slightly
    ``-OO``     remove doc-strings in addition to the -O optimizations
    ``-s``      do not add user site directory to sys.path
    ``-S``      do not run 'import site' on initialization
    ``-t``      issue warnings about inconsistent tab usage
    ``-tt``     issue errors for inconsistent tab usage
    ``-v``      verbose
    ========    =======

Some of these are available for programs to check through
:const:`sys.flags`.

.. include:: sys_flags.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Experiment with ``sys_flags.py`` to learn how the command line options
map to the flags settings.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(script_output(cog.inFile, '-S -E -b sys_flags.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 -S -E -b sys_flags.py
	
	Warning on bytes/str errors
	Not importing "site"
	Ignoring environment

.. {{{end}}}


.. _sys-unicode-defaults:

Unicode Defaults
================

To get the name of the default Unicode encoding being used by the
interpreter, use :func:`getdefaultencoding`.  The value is set during
start-up by :mod:`site`, which calls :func:`sys.setdefaultencoding` and
then removes it from the namespace in :mod:`sys` to avoid having it
called again.

The internal encoding default and the file system encoding may be
different for some operating systems, so there is a separate way to
retrieve the file system setting.  :func:`getfile systemencoding`
returns an OS-specific (*not* file system-specific) value.

.. include:: sys_unicode.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Rather than changing the global default encoding, most Unicode experts
recommend making an application explicitly Unicode-aware. This
provides two benefits: Different Unicode encodings for different data
sources can be handled more cleanly, and the number of assumptions
about encodings in the application code is reduced.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(script_output(cog.inFile, 'sys_unicode.py'))
.. }}}

::

	$ python3 sys_unicode.py
	
	Default encoding     : utf-8
	File system encoding : utf-8

.. {{{end}}}


Interactive Prompts
===================

The interactive interpreter uses two separate prompts for indicating
the default input level (:data:`ps1`) and the "continuation" of a
multi-line statement (:data:`ps2`).  The values are only used by the
interactive interpreter.

::

    >>> import sys
    >>> sys.ps1
    '>>> '
    >>> sys.ps2
    '... '
    >>>

Either or both prompt can be changed to a different string

::

    >>> sys.ps1 = '::: '
    ::: sys.ps2 = '~~~ '
    ::: for i in range(3):
    ~~~   print i
    ~~~ 
    0
    1
    2
    ::: 

Alternately, any object that can be converted to a string (via
``__str__``) can be used for the prompt.

.. include:: sys_ps1.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The :class:`LineCounter` keeps track of how many times it has been
used, so the number in the prompt increases each time.

::

    $ python
    Python 3.4.2 (v3.4.2:ab2c023a9432, Oct  5 2014, 20:42:22)
    [GCC 4.2.1 (Apple Inc. build 5666) (dot 3)] on darwin
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more
    information.
    >>> from source.sys.sys_ps1 import LineCounter
    >>> import sys
    >>> sys.ps1 = LineCounter()
    (  1)>
    (  2)>
    (  3)>

Display Hook
============

:data:`sys.displayhook` is invoked by the interactive interpreter each
time the user enters an expression.  The *result* of the expression is
passed as the only argument to the function.  

.. include:: sys_displayhook.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The default value (saved in :data:`sys.__displayhook__`) prints the
result to stdout and saves it in :data:`_` for easy
reference later.

::

    $ python3
    Python 3.4.2 (v3.4.2:ab2c023a9432, Oct  5 2014, 20:42:22)
    [GCC 4.2.1 (Apple Inc. build 5666) (dot 3)] on darwin
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more
    information.
    >>> import source.sys.sys_displayhook
    installing
    >>> 1 + 2
    
      Previous: <source.sys.sys_displayhook.ExpressionCounter
      object at 0x1021035f8>
      New     : 3
    
    3
    (  1)> 'abc'
    
      Previous: 3
      New     : abc
    
    'abc'
    (  2)> 'abc'
    
      Previous: abc
      New     : abc
    
    'abc'
    (  2)> 'abc' * 3
    
      Previous: abc
      New     : abcabcabc
    
    'abcabcabc'
    (  3)>


Install Location
================

The path to the actual interpreter program is available in
:const:`sys.executable` on all systems for which having a path to the
interpreter makes sense.  This can be useful for ensuring that the
correct interpreter is being used, and also gives clues about paths
that might be set based on the interpreter location.

:const:`sys.prefix` refers to the parent directory of the interpreter
installation.  It usually includes ``bin`` and ``lib`` directories for
executables and installed modules, respectively.

.. include:: sys_locations.py
    :literal:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

This example output was produced on a Mac running a framework build
installed from python.org.

::

	$ python3 sys_locations.py
	
    Interpreter executable: /Library/Frameworks/Python.framework/
    Versions/3.4/bin/python3.4
    Installation prefix   : /Library/Frameworks/Python.framework/
    Versions/3.4
