source/textwrap/index.rst, before:

=========================================
 textwrap --- Formatting Text Paragraphs
=========================================

.. module:: textwrap
    :synopsis: Formatting text paragraphs

The ``textwrap`` module can be used to format text for output in
situations where pretty-printing is desired. It offers programmatic
functionality similar to the paragraph wrapping or filling features
found in many text editors and word processors.

Example Data
============

The examples in this section use the module ``textwrap_example.py``,
which contains a string ``sample_text``.

.. literalinclude:: textwrap_example.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header


Filling Paragraphs
==================

The ``fill()`` function takes text as input and produces formatted
text as output.

.. literalinclude:: textwrap_fill.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The results are something less than desirable.  The text is now left
justified, but the first line retains its indent and the spaces from
the front of each subsequent line are embedded in the paragraph.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'textwrap_fill.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 textwrap_fill.py
	
	     The textwrap module can be used to format
	text for output in     situations where pretty-
	printing is desired.  It offers     programmatic
	functionality similar to the paragraph wrapping
	or filling features found in many text editors.

.. {{{end}}}


Removing Existing Indentation
=============================

The previous example has embedded tabs and extra spaces mixed into the
middle of the output, so it is not formatted very cleanly. Removing
the common whitespace prefix from all of the lines in the sample text
with ``dedent()`` produces better results and allows the use of
docstrings or embedded multi-line strings straight from Python code
while removing the formatting of the code itself. The sample string
has an artificial indent level introduced for illustrating this
feature.

.. literalinclude:: textwrap_dedent.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The results are starting to look better.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'textwrap_dedent.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 textwrap_dedent.py
	
	Dedented:
	
	The textwrap module can be used to format text for output in
	situations where pretty-printing is desired.  It offers
	programmatic functionality similar to the paragraph wrapping
	or filling features found in many text editors.
	

.. {{{end}}}

Since "dedent" is the opposite of "indent", the result is a block of
text with the common initial whitespace from each line removed. If one
line is already indented more than another, some of the whitespace
will not be removed.

Input like

.. only:: pearson

  .. raw:: latex

     \lstset{showspaces=true}

  .. literalinclude:: textwrap_undedented.txt

  .. raw:: latex

     \lstset{showspaces=false}

.. only:: html

  .. code-block:: none

    ␣Line one.
    ␣␣␣Line two.
    ␣Line three.

becomes

.. only:: pearson

  .. raw:: latex

     \lstset{showspaces=true}

  .. literalinclude:: textwrap_dedented.txt

  .. raw:: latex

     \lstset{showspaces=false}


.. only:: html

  .. code-block:: none

    Line one.
    ␣␣Line two.
    Line three.

Combining Dedent and Fill
=========================

Next, the dedented text can be passed through ``fill()`` with a
few different ``width`` values.

.. literalinclude:: textwrap_fill_width.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header


This produces outputs in the specified widths.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'textwrap_fill_width.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 textwrap_fill_width.py
	
	45 Columns:
	
	The textwrap module can be used to format
	text for output in situations where pretty-
	printing is desired.  It offers programmatic
	functionality similar to the paragraph
	wrapping or filling features found in many
	text editors.
	
	60 Columns:
	
	The textwrap module can be used to format text for output in
	situations where pretty-printing is desired.  It offers
	programmatic functionality similar to the paragraph wrapping
	or filling features found in many text editors.
	

.. {{{end}}}

Indenting Blocks
================

Use the ``indent()`` function to add consistent prefix text to all
of the lines in a string. This example formats the same example text
as though it was part of an email message being quoted in the reply,
using ``>`` as the prefix for each line.

.. literalinclude:: textwrap_indent.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The block of text is split on newlines, the prefix is added to each
line that contains text, and then the lines are combined back into a
new string and returned.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'textwrap_indent.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 textwrap_indent.py
	
	Quoted block:
	
	>  The textwrap module can be used to format text
	> for output in situations where pretty-printing is
	> desired.  It offers programmatic functionality
	> similar to the paragraph wrapping or filling
	> features found in many text editors.
	
	> Second paragraph after a blank line.

.. {{{end}}}

To control which lines receive the new prefix, pass a callable as the
``predicate`` argument to ``indent()``. The callable will be invoked for
each line of text in turn and the prefix will be added for lines where
the return value is true.

.. literalinclude:: textwrap_indent_predicate.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

This example adds the prefix ``EVEN`` to lines that contain an even
number of characters.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'textwrap_indent_predicate.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 textwrap_indent_predicate.py
	
	Indent ' The textwrap module can be used to format text\n'?
	Indent 'for output in situations where pretty-printing is\n'?
	Indent 'desired.  It offers programmatic functionality\n'?
	Indent 'similar to the paragraph wrapping or filling\n'?
	Indent 'features found in many text editors.'?
	
	Quoted block:
	
	EVEN  The textwrap module can be used to format text
	for output in situations where pretty-printing is
	EVEN desired.  It offers programmatic functionality
	EVEN similar to the paragraph wrapping or filling
	EVEN features found in many text editors.

.. {{{end}}}

Hanging Indents
===============

Just as the width of the output can be set, the indent of the first
line can be controlled independently of subsequent lines.

.. literalinclude:: textwrap_hanging_indent.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

This makes it possible to produce a hanging indent, where the
first line is indented less than the other lines.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'textwrap_hanging_indent.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 textwrap_hanging_indent.py
	
	The textwrap module can be used to format text for
	    output in situations where pretty-printing is
	    desired.  It offers programmatic functionality
	    similar to the paragraph wrapping or filling
	    features found in many text editors.

.. {{{end}}}

The indent values can include nonwhitespace characters, too. The
hanging indent can be prefixed with ``*`` to produce bullet points,
etc.

Truncating Long Text
====================

To truncate text to create a summary or preview, use
``shorten()``. All existing whitespace such as tabs, newlines, and
series of multiple spaces will be standardized to a single space. Then
the text will be truncated to a length less than or equal to what is
requested, between word boundaries so that no partial words are
included.

.. literalinclude:: textwrap_shorten.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

If non-whitespace text is removed from the original text as part of
the truncation, it is replaced with a placeholder value. The default
value ``[...]`` can be replaced by providing a ``placeholder``
argument to ``shorten()``.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'textwrap_shorten.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 textwrap_shorten.py
	
	Original:
	
	 The textwrap module can be used to format text
	for output in situations where pretty-printing is
	desired.  It offers programmatic functionality
	similar to the paragraph wrapping or filling
	features found in many text editors.
	
	Shortened:
	
	The textwrap module can be used to format text for
	output in situations where pretty-printing [...]

.. {{{end}}}



.. seealso::

    * :pydoc:`textwrap`

Commit message:

textwrap: add comment about why whitespace is turned on for a couple of listings

source/textwrap/index.rst, after:

=========================================
 textwrap --- Formatting Text Paragraphs
=========================================

.. module:: textwrap
    :synopsis: Formatting text paragraphs

The ``textwrap`` module can be used to format text for output in
situations where pretty-printing is desired. It offers programmatic
functionality similar to the paragraph wrapping or filling features
found in many text editors and word processors.

Example Data
============

The examples in this section use the module ``textwrap_example.py``,
which contains a string ``sample_text``.

.. literalinclude:: textwrap_example.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header


Filling Paragraphs
==================

The ``fill()`` function takes text as input and produces formatted
text as output.

.. literalinclude:: textwrap_fill.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The results are something less than desirable.  The text is now left
justified, but the first line retains its indent and the spaces from
the front of each subsequent line are embedded in the paragraph.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'textwrap_fill.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 textwrap_fill.py
	
	     The textwrap module can be used to format
	text for output in     situations where pretty-
	printing is desired.  It offers     programmatic
	functionality similar to the paragraph wrapping
	or filling features found in many text editors.

.. {{{end}}}


Removing Existing Indentation
=============================

The previous example has embedded tabs and extra spaces mixed into the
middle of the output, so it is not formatted very cleanly. Removing
the common whitespace prefix from all of the lines in the sample text
with ``dedent()`` produces better results and allows the use of
docstrings or embedded multi-line strings straight from Python code
while removing the formatting of the code itself. The sample string
has an artificial indent level introduced for illustrating this
feature.

.. literalinclude:: textwrap_dedent.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The results are starting to look better.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'textwrap_dedent.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 textwrap_dedent.py
	
	Dedented:
	
	The textwrap module can be used to format text for output in
	situations where pretty-printing is desired.  It offers
	programmatic functionality similar to the paragraph wrapping
	or filling features found in many text editors.
	

.. {{{end}}}

Since "dedent" is the opposite of "indent", the result is a block of
text with the common initial whitespace from each line removed. If one
line is already indented more than another, some of the whitespace
will not be removed.

Input like

.. only:: pearson

  .. raw:: latex

     %% (dhellmann) Show spaces in this example talking about
     %% indentation changes
     \lstset{showspaces=true}

  .. literalinclude:: textwrap_undedented.txt

  .. raw:: latex

     \lstset{showspaces=false}

.. only:: html

  .. code-block:: none

    ␣Line one.
    ␣␣␣Line two.
    ␣Line three.

becomes

.. only:: pearson

  .. raw:: latex

     %% (dhellmann) Show spaces in this example talking about
     %% indentation changes
     \lstset{showspaces=true}

  .. literalinclude:: textwrap_dedented.txt

  .. raw:: latex

     \lstset{showspaces=false}


.. only:: html

  .. code-block:: none

    Line one.
    ␣␣Line two.
    Line three.

Combining Dedent and Fill
=========================

Next, the dedented text can be passed through ``fill()`` with a
few different ``width`` values.

.. literalinclude:: textwrap_fill_width.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header


This produces outputs in the specified widths.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'textwrap_fill_width.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 textwrap_fill_width.py
	
	45 Columns:
	
	The textwrap module can be used to format
	text for output in situations where pretty-
	printing is desired.  It offers programmatic
	functionality similar to the paragraph
	wrapping or filling features found in many
	text editors.
	
	60 Columns:
	
	The textwrap module can be used to format text for output in
	situations where pretty-printing is desired.  It offers
	programmatic functionality similar to the paragraph wrapping
	or filling features found in many text editors.
	

.. {{{end}}}

Indenting Blocks
================

Use the ``indent()`` function to add consistent prefix text to all
of the lines in a string. This example formats the same example text
as though it was part of an email message being quoted in the reply,
using ``>`` as the prefix for each line.

.. literalinclude:: textwrap_indent.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The block of text is split on newlines, the prefix is added to each
line that contains text, and then the lines are combined back into a
new string and returned.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'textwrap_indent.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 textwrap_indent.py
	
	Quoted block:
	
	>  The textwrap module can be used to format text
	> for output in situations where pretty-printing is
	> desired.  It offers programmatic functionality
	> similar to the paragraph wrapping or filling
	> features found in many text editors.
	
	> Second paragraph after a blank line.

.. {{{end}}}

To control which lines receive the new prefix, pass a callable as the
``predicate`` argument to ``indent()``. The callable will be invoked for
each line of text in turn and the prefix will be added for lines where
the return value is true.

.. literalinclude:: textwrap_indent_predicate.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

This example adds the prefix ``EVEN`` to lines that contain an even
number of characters.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'textwrap_indent_predicate.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 textwrap_indent_predicate.py
	
	Indent ' The textwrap module can be used to format text\n'?
	Indent 'for output in situations where pretty-printing is\n'?
	Indent 'desired.  It offers programmatic functionality\n'?
	Indent 'similar to the paragraph wrapping or filling\n'?
	Indent 'features found in many text editors.'?
	
	Quoted block:
	
	EVEN  The textwrap module can be used to format text
	for output in situations where pretty-printing is
	EVEN desired.  It offers programmatic functionality
	EVEN similar to the paragraph wrapping or filling
	EVEN features found in many text editors.

.. {{{end}}}

Hanging Indents
===============

Just as the width of the output can be set, the indent of the first
line can be controlled independently of subsequent lines.

.. literalinclude:: textwrap_hanging_indent.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

This makes it possible to produce a hanging indent, where the
first line is indented less than the other lines.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'textwrap_hanging_indent.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 textwrap_hanging_indent.py
	
	The textwrap module can be used to format text for
	    output in situations where pretty-printing is
	    desired.  It offers programmatic functionality
	    similar to the paragraph wrapping or filling
	    features found in many text editors.

.. {{{end}}}

The indent values can include nonwhitespace characters, too. The
hanging indent can be prefixed with ``*`` to produce bullet points,
etc.

Truncating Long Text
====================

To truncate text to create a summary or preview, use
``shorten()``. All existing whitespace such as tabs, newlines, and
series of multiple spaces will be standardized to a single space. Then
the text will be truncated to a length less than or equal to what is
requested, between word boundaries so that no partial words are
included.

.. literalinclude:: textwrap_shorten.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

If non-whitespace text is removed from the original text as part of
the truncation, it is replaced with a placeholder value. The default
value ``[...]`` can be replaced by providing a ``placeholder``
argument to ``shorten()``.

.. {{{cog
.. cog.out(run_script(cog.inFile, 'textwrap_shorten.py'))
.. }}}

.. code-block:: none

	$ python3 textwrap_shorten.py
	
	Original:
	
	 The textwrap module can be used to format text
	for output in situations where pretty-printing is
	desired.  It offers programmatic functionality
	similar to the paragraph wrapping or filling
	features found in many text editors.
	
	Shortened:
	
	The textwrap module can be used to format text for
	output in situations where pretty-printing [...]

.. {{{end}}}



.. seealso::

    * :pydoc:`textwrap`
