source/http.server/index.rst, before:

===========================================================
 http.server --- Base Classes for Implementing Web Servers
===========================================================

.. module:: http.server
    :synopsis: Base classes for implementing web servers.

:Purpose: http.server includes classes that can form the basis of a
          web server.

:mod:`http.server` uses classes from :mod:`socketserver` to create
base classes for making HTTP servers. :class:`HTTPServer` can be used
directly, but the :class:`BaseHTTPRequestHandler` is intended to be
extended to handle each protocol method (GET, POST, etc.).

HTTP GET
========

To add support for an HTTP method in a request handler class,
implement the method :func:`do_METHOD`, replacing *METHOD* with the
name of the HTTP method (e.g., :func:`do_GET`, :func:`do_POST`,
etc.). For consistency, the request handler methods take no
arguments. All of the parameters for the request are parsed by
:class:`BaseHTTPRequestHandler` and stored as instance attributes of
the request instance.

This example request handler illustrates how to return a response to the
client, and some of the local attributes that can be useful in building the
response.

.. literalinclude:: http_server_GET.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The message text is assembled and then written to :attr:`wfile`, the
file handle wrapping the response socket. Each response needs a
response code, set via :func:`send_response`. If an error code is used
(404, 501, etc.), an appropriate default error message is included in
the header, or a message can be passed with the error code.

To run the request handler in a server, pass it to the constructor of
:class:`HTTPServer`, as in the ``__main__`` processing portion of the
sample script.

Then start the server:

.. code-block:: none

    $ python3 http_server_GET.py 

    Starting server, use <Ctrl-C> to stop

In a separate terminal, use ``curl`` to access it:

.. code-block:: none

    $ curl -v -i http://127.0.0.1:8080/?foo=bar

    *   Trying 127.0.0.1...
    * Connected to 127.0.0.1 (127.0.0.1) port 8080 (#0)
    > GET /?foo=bar HTTP/1.1
    > Host: 127.0.0.1:8080
    > User-Agent: curl/7.43.0
    > Accept: */*
    >
    HTTP/1.0 200 OK
    Content-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8
    Server: BaseHTTP/0.6 Python/3.5.2
    Date: Thu, 06 Oct 2016 20:44:11 GMT
    
    CLIENT VALUES:
    client_address=('127.0.0.1', 52934) (127.0.0.1)
    command=GET
    path=/?foo=bar
    real path=/
    query=foo=bar
    request_version=HTTP/1.1
    
    SERVER VALUES:
    server_version=BaseHTTP/0.6
    sys_version=Python/3.5.2
    protocol_version=HTTP/1.0
    
    HEADERS RECEIVED:
    Accept=*/*
    Host=127.0.0.1:8080
    User-Agent=curl/7.43.0
    * Connection #0 to host 127.0.0.1 left intact


HTTP POST
=========

Supporting POST requests is a little more work, because the base class
does not parse the form data automatically. The :mod:`cgi` module
provides the :class:`FieldStorage` class which knows how to parse the
form, if it is given the correct inputs.

.. literalinclude:: http_server_POST.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Run the server in one window:

.. code-block:: none

    $ python3 http_server_POST.py 
    
    Starting server, use <Ctrl-C> to stop

The arguments to :command:`curl` can include form data to be posted to
the server by using the ``-F`` option. The last argument, ``-F
datafile=@http_server_GET.py``, posts the contents of the file
``http_server_GET.py`` to illustrate reading file data from the
form.

.. code-block:: none
    
    $ curl -v http://127.0.0.1:8080/ -F name=dhellmann -F foo=bar \
    -F datafile=@http_server_GET.py
    
    *   Trying 127.0.0.1...
    * Connected to 127.0.0.1 (127.0.0.1) port 8080 (#0)
    > POST / HTTP/1.1
    > Host: 127.0.0.1:8080
    > User-Agent: curl/7.43.0
    > Accept: */*
    > Content-Length: 1974
    > Expect: 100-continue
    > Content-Type: multipart/form-data; 
    boundary=------------------------a2b3c7485cf8def2
    >
    * Done waiting for 100-continue
    HTTP/1.0 200 OK
    Content-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8
    Server: BaseHTTP/0.6 Python/3.5.2
    Date: Thu, 06 Oct 2016 20:53:48 GMT
    
    Client: ('127.0.0.1', 53121)
    User-agent: curl/7.43.0
    Path: /
    Form data:
        name=dhellmann
        Uploaded datafile as "http_server_GET.py" (1563 bytes)
        foo=bar
    * Connection #0 to host 127.0.0.1 left intact

Threading and Forking
=====================

:class:`HTTPServer` is a simple subclass of
:class:`socketserver.TCPServer`, and does not use multiple threads or
processes to handle requests. To add threading or forking, create a
new class using the appropriate mix-in from :mod:`socketserver`.

.. literalinclude:: http_server_threads.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Run the server in the same way as the other examples.

.. code-block:: none

    $ python3 http_server_threads.py 
    
    Starting server, use <Ctrl-C> to stop

Each time the server receives a request, it starts a new thread or
process to handle it:

.. code-block:: none

    $ curl http://127.0.0.1:8080/

    Thread-1

    $ curl http://127.0.0.1:8080/

    Thread-2

    $ curl http://127.0.0.1:8080/

    Thread-3

Swapping :class:`ForkingMixIn` for :class:`ThreadingMixIn` would
achieve similar results, using separate processes instead of threads.

Handling Errors
===============

Handle errors by calling :meth:`send_error`, passing the
appropriate error code and an optional error message.  The entire
response (with headers, status code, and body) is generated
automatically.

.. literalinclude:: http_server_errors.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

In this case, a 404 error is always returned.

.. code-block:: none

    $ python3 http_server_errors.py 
    
    Starting server, use <Ctrl-C> to stop

The error message is reported to the client using an HTML document as
well as the header to indicate an error code.

.. code-block:: none

    $ curl -i http://127.0.0.1:8080/

    HTTP/1.0 404 Not Found
    Server: BaseHTTP/0.6 Python/3.5.2
    Date: Thu, 06 Oct 2016 20:58:08 GMT
    Connection: close
    Content-Type: text/html;charset=utf-8
    Content-Length: 447
    
    <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.01//EN"
            "http://www.w3.org/TR/html4/strict.dtd">
    <html>
        <head>
            <meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
            content="text/html;charset=utf-8">
            <title>Error response</title>
        </head>
        <body>
            <h1>Error response</h1>
            <p>Error code: 404</p>
            <p>Message: Not Found.</p>
            <p>Error code explanation: 404 - Nothing matches the 
            given URI.</p>
        </body>
    </html>


Setting Headers
===============

The :mod:`send_header` method adds header data to the HTTP response.
It takes two arguments: the name of the header and the value.

.. literalinclude:: http_server_send_header.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

This example sets the ``Last-Modified`` header to the current
timestamp, formatted according to RFC 2822.

.. code-block:: none

    $ curl -i http://127.0.0.1:8080/

    HTTP/1.0 200 OK
    Server: BaseHTTP/0.6 Python/3.5.2
    Date: Thu, 06 Oct 2016 21:00:54 GMT
    Content-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8
    Last-Modified: Thu, 06 Oct 2016 21:00:54 GMT
    
    Response body

The server logs the request to the terminal, like in the other
examples.

.. code-block:: none

    $ python3 http_server_send_header.py 
    
    Starting server, use <Ctrl-C> to stop
    127.0.0.1 - - [06/Oct/2016 17:00:54] "GET / HTTP/1.1" 200 -


.. seealso::

   * :pydoc:`http.server`

   * :mod:`socketserver` -- The ``socketserver`` module provides the
     base class that handles the raw socket connection.

   * :rfc:`2822` -- The "Internet Message Format" specifies a format
     for text-based messages such as email and HTTP responses.

Commit message:

http.server: add example of serving local files

source/http.server/index.rst, after:

===========================================================
 http.server --- Base Classes for Implementing Web Servers
===========================================================

.. module:: http.server
    :synopsis: Base classes for implementing web servers.

:Purpose: http.server includes classes that can form the basis of a
          web server.

:mod:`http.server` uses classes from :mod:`socketserver` to create
base classes for making HTTP servers. :class:`HTTPServer` can be used
directly, but the :class:`BaseHTTPRequestHandler` is intended to be
extended to handle each protocol method (GET, POST, etc.).

HTTP GET
========

To add support for an HTTP method in a request handler class,
implement the method :func:`do_METHOD`, replacing *METHOD* with the
name of the HTTP method (e.g., :func:`do_GET`, :func:`do_POST`,
etc.). For consistency, the request handler methods take no
arguments. All of the parameters for the request are parsed by
:class:`BaseHTTPRequestHandler` and stored as instance attributes of
the request instance.

This example request handler illustrates how to return a response to the
client, and some of the local attributes that can be useful in building the
response.

.. literalinclude:: http_server_GET.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

The message text is assembled and then written to :attr:`wfile`, the
file handle wrapping the response socket. Each response needs a
response code, set via :func:`send_response`. If an error code is used
(404, 501, etc.), an appropriate default error message is included in
the header, or a message can be passed with the error code.

To run the request handler in a server, pass it to the constructor of
:class:`HTTPServer`, as in the ``__main__`` processing portion of the
sample script.

Then start the server:

.. code-block:: none

    $ python3 http_server_GET.py 

    Starting server, use <Ctrl-C> to stop

In a separate terminal, use ``curl`` to access it:

.. code-block:: none

    $ curl -v -i http://127.0.0.1:8080/?foo=bar

    *   Trying 127.0.0.1...
    * Connected to 127.0.0.1 (127.0.0.1) port 8080 (#0)
    > GET /?foo=bar HTTP/1.1
    > Host: 127.0.0.1:8080
    > User-Agent: curl/7.43.0
    > Accept: */*
    >
    HTTP/1.0 200 OK
    Content-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8
    Server: BaseHTTP/0.6 Python/3.5.2
    Date: Thu, 06 Oct 2016 20:44:11 GMT
    
    CLIENT VALUES:
    client_address=('127.0.0.1', 52934) (127.0.0.1)
    command=GET
    path=/?foo=bar
    real path=/
    query=foo=bar
    request_version=HTTP/1.1
    
    SERVER VALUES:
    server_version=BaseHTTP/0.6
    sys_version=Python/3.5.2
    protocol_version=HTTP/1.0
    
    HEADERS RECEIVED:
    Accept=*/*
    Host=127.0.0.1:8080
    User-Agent=curl/7.43.0
    * Connection #0 to host 127.0.0.1 left intact


HTTP POST
=========

Supporting POST requests is a little more work, because the base class
does not parse the form data automatically. The :mod:`cgi` module
provides the :class:`FieldStorage` class which knows how to parse the
form, if it is given the correct inputs.

.. literalinclude:: http_server_POST.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Run the server in one window:

.. code-block:: none

    $ python3 http_server_POST.py 
    
    Starting server, use <Ctrl-C> to stop

The arguments to :command:`curl` can include form data to be posted to
the server by using the ``-F`` option. The last argument, ``-F
datafile=@http_server_GET.py``, posts the contents of the file
``http_server_GET.py`` to illustrate reading file data from the
form.

.. code-block:: none
    
    $ curl -v http://127.0.0.1:8080/ -F name=dhellmann -F foo=bar \
    -F datafile=@http_server_GET.py
    
    *   Trying 127.0.0.1...
    * Connected to 127.0.0.1 (127.0.0.1) port 8080 (#0)
    > POST / HTTP/1.1
    > Host: 127.0.0.1:8080
    > User-Agent: curl/7.43.0
    > Accept: */*
    > Content-Length: 1974
    > Expect: 100-continue
    > Content-Type: multipart/form-data; 
    boundary=------------------------a2b3c7485cf8def2
    >
    * Done waiting for 100-continue
    HTTP/1.0 200 OK
    Content-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8
    Server: BaseHTTP/0.6 Python/3.5.2
    Date: Thu, 06 Oct 2016 20:53:48 GMT
    
    Client: ('127.0.0.1', 53121)
    User-agent: curl/7.43.0
    Path: /
    Form data:
        name=dhellmann
        Uploaded datafile as "http_server_GET.py" (1563 bytes)
        foo=bar
    * Connection #0 to host 127.0.0.1 left intact

Threading and Forking
=====================

:class:`HTTPServer` is a simple subclass of
:class:`socketserver.TCPServer`, and does not use multiple threads or
processes to handle requests. To add threading or forking, create a
new class using the appropriate mix-in from :mod:`socketserver`.

.. literalinclude:: http_server_threads.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

Run the server in the same way as the other examples.

.. code-block:: none

    $ python3 http_server_threads.py 
    
    Starting server, use <Ctrl-C> to stop

Each time the server receives a request, it starts a new thread or
process to handle it:

.. code-block:: none

    $ curl http://127.0.0.1:8080/

    Thread-1

    $ curl http://127.0.0.1:8080/

    Thread-2

    $ curl http://127.0.0.1:8080/

    Thread-3

Swapping :class:`ForkingMixIn` for :class:`ThreadingMixIn` would
achieve similar results, using separate processes instead of threads.

Handling Errors
===============

Handle errors by calling :meth:`send_error`, passing the
appropriate error code and an optional error message.  The entire
response (with headers, status code, and body) is generated
automatically.

.. literalinclude:: http_server_errors.py
    :caption:
    :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

In this case, a 404 error is always returned.

.. code-block:: none

    $ python3 http_server_errors.py 
    
    Starting server, use <Ctrl-C> to stop

The error message is reported to the client using an HTML document as
well as the header to indicate an error code.

.. code-block:: none

    $ curl -i http://127.0.0.1:8080/

    HTTP/1.0 404 Not Found
    Server: BaseHTTP/0.6 Python/3.5.2
    Date: Thu, 06 Oct 2016 20:58:08 GMT
    Connection: close
    Content-Type: text/html;charset=utf-8
    Content-Length: 447
    
    <!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.01//EN"
            "http://www.w3.org/TR/html4/strict.dtd">
    <html>
        <head>
            <meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
            content="text/html;charset=utf-8">
            <title>Error response</title>
        </head>
        <body>
            <h1>Error response</h1>
            <p>Error code: 404</p>
            <p>Message: Not Found.</p>
            <p>Error code explanation: 404 - Nothing matches the 
            given URI.</p>
        </body>
    </html>


Setting Headers
===============

The :mod:`send_header` method adds header data to the HTTP response.
It takes two arguments: the name of the header and the value.

.. literalinclude:: http_server_send_header.py
   :caption:
   :start-after: #end_pymotw_header

This example sets the ``Last-Modified`` header to the current
timestamp, formatted according to RFC 2822.

.. code-block:: none

    $ curl -i http://127.0.0.1:8080/

    HTTP/1.0 200 OK
    Server: BaseHTTP/0.6 Python/3.5.2
    Date: Thu, 06 Oct 2016 21:00:54 GMT
    Content-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8
    Last-Modified: Thu, 06 Oct 2016 21:00:54 GMT
    
    Response body

The server logs the request to the terminal, like in the other
examples.

.. code-block:: none

    $ python3 http_server_send_header.py 
    
    Starting server, use <Ctrl-C> to stop
    127.0.0.1 - - [06/Oct/2016 17:00:54] "GET / HTTP/1.1" 200 -

Command Line Use
================

:mod:`http.server` includes a built-in server for serving files from
the local file system. Start it from the command line using the ``-m``
option for the Python interpreter.

.. code-block:: none

   $ python3 -m http.server 8080

   Serving HTTP on 0.0.0.0 port 8080 ...
   127.0.0.1 - - [06/Oct/2016 17:12:48] "HEAD /index.rst HTTP/1.1" 200 -

The root directory of the server is the working directory where the
server is started.

.. code-block:: none

   $ curl -I http://127.0.0.1:8080/index.rst

   HTTP/1.0 200 OK
   Server: SimpleHTTP/0.6 Python/3.5.2
   Date: Thu, 06 Oct 2016 21:12:48 GMT
   Content-type: application/octet-stream
   Content-Length: 8285
   Last-Modified: Thu, 06 Oct 2016 21:12:10 GMT


.. seealso::

   * :pydoc:`http.server`

   * :mod:`socketserver` -- The ``socketserver`` module provides the
     base class that handles the raw socket connection.

   * :rfc:`2822` -- The "Internet Message Format" specifies a format
     for text-based messages such as email and HTTP responses.
