source/dev_tools.rst, before:

=================
 Developer Tools
=================

Over the course of its lifetime, Python has evolved an extensive
ecosystem of modules intended to make the lives of Python developers
easier by eliminating the need to build everything from scratch.  That
same philosophy has been applied to the tools developers use to do
their work, even if they are not used in the final version of a
program.  This chapter covers the modules included with Python to
provide facilities for common development tasks such as testing,
debugging, and profiling.

The most basic form of help for a developer is the documentation for
code they are using.  The :mod:`pydoc` module generates formatted
reference documentation from the docstrings included in the source
code for any importable module.

Python includes two testing frameworks for automatically exercising
code and verifying that it works correctly.  :mod:`doctest` extracts
test scenarios from examples included in documentation, either inside
the source or as stand-alone files.  :mod:`unittest` is a
full-featured automated testing framework with support for fixtures,
pre-defined test suites, and test discovery.

The :mod:`trace` module monitors the way Python executes a program,
producing a report showing how many times each line was run.  That
information can be used to find code paths that are not being tested
by an automated test suite, and to study the function call graph to
find dependencies between modules.

Writing and running tests will uncover problems in most programs.
Python helps make debugging easier, since in most cases unhandled
errors are printed to the console as tracebacks.  When a program is
not running in a text console environment, :mod:`traceback` can be
used to prepare similar output for a log file or message dialog.  For
situations where a standard traceback does not provide enough
information, use :mod:`cgitb` to see details like local variable
settings at each level of the stack and source context.  :mod:`cgitb`
can also format tracebacks in HTML, for reporting errors in web
applications.

Once the location of a problem is identified, stepping through the
code using the interactive debugger in the :mod:`pdb` module can make
it easier to fix by showing what path through the code was followed to
get to the error situation, and experimenting with changes using live
objects and code.

After a program is tested and debugged so that it works correctly, the
next step is to work on performance.  Using :mod:`profile` and
:mod:`timeit`, a developer can measure the speed of a program and find
the slow parts so they can be isolated and improved.

Python programs are run by giving the interpreter a byte-compiled
version of the original program source.  The byte-compiled versions
can be created on-the-fly, or once when the program is packaged.  The
:mod:`compileall` module exposes the interface used by installation
programs and packaging tools to create files containing the byte code
for a module.  It can be used in a development environment to make
sure a file does not have any syntax errors and to build the
byte-compiled files to package when the program is released.

At the source code level, the :mod:`pyclbr` module provides a class
browser that can be used by a text editor or other program to scan
Python source for interesting symbols such as functions and classes,
without importing the code and potentially triggering side-effects.

Python virtual environments, managed by :mod:`venv`, define isolated
environments for installing packages and running programs. They make
it easy to test the same program with different versions of
dependencies, and to install different programs with conflicting
dependencies on the same computer.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    doctest/index
    cgitb/index
    compileall/index
    pdb/index
    profile/index
    tabnanny/index
    venv/index
    ensurepip/index

..
    pydoc/index
    doctest/index
    unittest/index
    traceback/index
    pdb/index
    trace/index
    profile/index
    timeit/index
    pyclbr/index

Commit message:

ensurepip: add chapter intro info
Change-Id: Ifee8b80aaf66392d27b3c827eb628dd1fe17d85b
Signed-off-by: Doug Hellmann <doug@doughellmann.com>

source/dev_tools.rst, after:

=================
 Developer Tools
=================

Over the course of its lifetime, Python has evolved an extensive
ecosystem of modules intended to make the lives of Python developers
easier by eliminating the need to build everything from scratch.  That
same philosophy has been applied to the tools developers use to do
their work, even if they are not used in the final version of a
program.  This chapter covers the modules included with Python to
provide facilities for common development tasks such as testing,
debugging, and profiling.

The most basic form of help for a developer is the documentation for
code they are using.  The :mod:`pydoc` module generates formatted
reference documentation from the docstrings included in the source
code for any importable module.

Python includes two testing frameworks for automatically exercising
code and verifying that it works correctly.  :mod:`doctest` extracts
test scenarios from examples included in documentation, either inside
the source or as stand-alone files.  :mod:`unittest` is a
full-featured automated testing framework with support for fixtures,
pre-defined test suites, and test discovery.

The :mod:`trace` module monitors the way Python executes a program,
producing a report showing how many times each line was run.  That
information can be used to find code paths that are not being tested
by an automated test suite, and to study the function call graph to
find dependencies between modules.

Writing and running tests will uncover problems in most programs.
Python helps make debugging easier, since in most cases unhandled
errors are printed to the console as tracebacks.  When a program is
not running in a text console environment, :mod:`traceback` can be
used to prepare similar output for a log file or message dialog.  For
situations where a standard traceback does not provide enough
information, use :mod:`cgitb` to see details like local variable
settings at each level of the stack and source context.  :mod:`cgitb`
can also format tracebacks in HTML, for reporting errors in web
applications.

Once the location of a problem is identified, stepping through the
code using the interactive debugger in the :mod:`pdb` module can make
it easier to fix by showing what path through the code was followed to
get to the error situation, and experimenting with changes using live
objects and code.

After a program is tested and debugged so that it works correctly, the
next step is to work on performance.  Using :mod:`profile` and
:mod:`timeit`, a developer can measure the speed of a program and find
the slow parts so they can be isolated and improved.

Python programs are run by giving the interpreter a byte-compiled
version of the original program source.  The byte-compiled versions
can be created on-the-fly, or once when the program is packaged.  The
:mod:`compileall` module exposes the interface used by installation
programs and packaging tools to create files containing the byte code
for a module.  It can be used in a development environment to make
sure a file does not have any syntax errors and to build the
byte-compiled files to package when the program is released.

At the source code level, the :mod:`pyclbr` module provides a class
browser that can be used by a text editor or other program to scan
Python source for interesting symbols such as functions and classes,
without importing the code and potentially triggering side-effects.

Python virtual environments, managed by :mod:`venv`, define isolated
environments for installing packages and running programs. They make
it easy to test the same program with different versions of
dependencies, and to install different programs with conflicting
dependencies on the same computer.

Taking advantage of the large ecosystem of extension modules,
frameworks, and tools available through the Python Package Index
requires a package installer. Python's package installer, pip, is not
distributed with the interpreter, because of the long release cycle
for the language compared to desired updates to the tool. The
:mod:`ensurepip` module can be used to install the latest version of
pip.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    doctest/index
    cgitb/index
    compileall/index
    pdb/index
    profile/index
    tabnanny/index
    venv/index
    ensurepip/index

..
    pydoc/index
    doctest/index
    unittest/index
    traceback/index
    pdb/index
    trace/index
    profile/index
    timeit/index
    pyclbr/index
