source/frameworks.rst, before:

===========================
Application Building Blocks
===========================

The strength of Python's standard library is its size.  It includes
implementations of so many aspects of a program's structure that
developers can concentrate on what makes their application unique,
instead of implementing all the basic pieces over and over again.
This chapter covers some of the more frequently reused building blocks
that solve problems common to so many applications.

:mod:`argparse` is an interface for parsing and validating command
line arguments.  It supports converting arguments from strings to
integers and other types, running callbacks when an option is
encountered, setting default values for options not provided by the
user, and automatically producing usage instructions for a program.

Interactive programs should use :mod:`readline` to give the user a
command prompt.  It includes tools for managing history,
auto-completing parts of commands, and interactive editing with
:command:`emacs` and :command:`vi` key-bindings.  To securely prompt
the user for a password or other secret value, without echoing the
value to the screen as it is typed, use :mod:`getpass`.

The :mod:`cmd` module includes a framework for interactive,
command-driven shell style programs.  It provides the main loop and
handles the interaction with the user so the application only needs to
implement the processing callbacks for the individual commands.

:mod:`shlex` is a parser for shell-style syntax, with lines made up of
tokens separated by white-space.  It is smart about quotes and escape
sequences, so text with embedded spaces is treated as a single token.
:mod:`shlex` works well as the tokenizer for domain-specific languages
such as configuration files or programming languages.

It is easy to manage application configuration files with
:mod:`configparser`.  It can save user preferences between program
runs and read them the next time an application starts, or even serve
as a simple data file format.

Applications being deployed in the real world need to give their users
debugging information.  Simple error messages and tracebacks are
helpful, but when it is difficult to reproduce an issue a full
activity log can point directly to the chain of events that leads to a
failure.  The :mod:`logging` module includes a full-featured API that
manages log files, supports multiple threads, and even interfaces with
remote logging daemons for centralized logging.

One of the most common patterns for programs in UNIX environments is a
line-by-line filter that reads data, modifies it, and writes it back
out.  Reading from files is simple enough, but there may not be an
easier way to create a filter application than by using the
:mod:`fileinput` module.  Its API is a line iterator that yields each
input line, so the main body of the program is a simple :command:`for`
loop.  The module handles parsing command line arguments for filenames
to be processed, or falling back to reading directly from standard
input, so tools built on :mod:`fileinput` can be run directly on a
file or as part of a pipeline.

Use :mod:`atexit` to schedule functions to be run as the interpreter is
shutting down a program.  Registering exit callbacks is useful for
releasing resources by logging out of remote services, closing files,
etc.

The :mod:`sched` module implements a scheduler for triggering events
at set times in the future.  The API does not dictate the definition
of "time," so anything from true clock time to interpreter steps can
be used.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   argparse/index
   getpass/index
   shlex/index
   configparser/index
   atexit/index
   fileinput/index

..
   getopt/index
   optparse/index
   argparse/index
   readline/index
   getpass/index
   cmd/index
   shlex/index
   ConfigParser/index
   logging/index
   fileinput/index
   atexit/index
   sched/index

..    runpy/index

Commit message:

getopt: cleanup and tie into toctree
Change-Id: I7c4e33ab968cffd743dc473088d07f9572d85377
Signed-off-by: Doug Hellmann <doug@doughellmann.com>

source/frameworks.rst, after:

===========================
Application Building Blocks
===========================

The strength of Python's standard library is its size.  It includes
implementations of so many aspects of a program's structure that
developers can concentrate on what makes their application unique,
instead of implementing all the basic pieces over and over again.
This chapter covers some of the more frequently reused building blocks
that solve problems common to so many applications.

:mod:`argparse` is an interface for parsing and validating command
line arguments.  It supports converting arguments from strings to
integers and other types, running callbacks when an option is
encountered, setting default values for options not provided by the
user, and automatically producing usage instructions for a program.
:mod:`getopt` implements the low level argument
processing model available to C programs and shell scripts.  It has
fewer features than other option parsing libraries, but that
simplicity and familiarity make it a popular choice.

Interactive programs should use :mod:`readline` to give the user a
command prompt.  It includes tools for managing history,
auto-completing parts of commands, and interactive editing with
:command:`emacs` and :command:`vi` key-bindings.  To securely prompt
the user for a password or other secret value, without echoing the
value to the screen as it is typed, use :mod:`getpass`.

The :mod:`cmd` module includes a framework for interactive,
command-driven shell style programs.  It provides the main loop and
handles the interaction with the user so the application only needs to
implement the processing callbacks for the individual commands.

:mod:`shlex` is a parser for shell-style syntax, with lines made up of
tokens separated by white-space.  It is smart about quotes and escape
sequences, so text with embedded spaces is treated as a single token.
:mod:`shlex` works well as the tokenizer for domain-specific languages
such as configuration files or programming languages.

It is easy to manage application configuration files with
:mod:`configparser`.  It can save user preferences between program
runs and read them the next time an application starts, or even serve
as a simple data file format.

Applications being deployed in the real world need to give their users
debugging information.  Simple error messages and tracebacks are
helpful, but when it is difficult to reproduce an issue a full
activity log can point directly to the chain of events that leads to a
failure.  The :mod:`logging` module includes a full-featured API that
manages log files, supports multiple threads, and even interfaces with
remote logging daemons for centralized logging.

One of the most common patterns for programs in UNIX environments is a
line-by-line filter that reads data, modifies it, and writes it back
out.  Reading from files is simple enough, but there may not be an
easier way to create a filter application than by using the
:mod:`fileinput` module.  Its API is a line iterator that yields each
input line, so the main body of the program is a simple :command:`for`
loop.  The module handles parsing command line arguments for filenames
to be processed, or falling back to reading directly from standard
input, so tools built on :mod:`fileinput` can be run directly on a
file or as part of a pipeline.

Use :mod:`atexit` to schedule functions to be run as the interpreter is
shutting down a program.  Registering exit callbacks is useful for
releasing resources by logging out of remote services, closing files,
etc.

The :mod:`sched` module implements a scheduler for triggering events
at set times in the future.  The API does not dictate the definition
of "time," so anything from true clock time to interpreter steps can
be used.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   argparse/index
   getopt/index
   getpass/index
   shlex/index
   configparser/index
   atexit/index
   fileinput/index

..
   getopt/index
   optparse/index
   argparse/index
   readline/index
   getpass/index
   cmd/index
   shlex/index
   ConfigParser/index
   logging/index
   fileinput/index
   atexit/index
   sched/index

..    runpy/index
